?The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of Elizabeth Barrett
Browning, Vol. I, by Elizabeth  Barrett Browning

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Poetical Works of Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Vol. I

Author: Elizabeth  Barrett Browning

Release Date: September 18, 2011 [EBook #37452]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POETICAL WORKS OF ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Judith Wirawan, Henry Craig
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)









THE POETICAL WORKS
OF
ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING

_IN SIX VOLUMES_

LONDON
SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE
1890




ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING'S
POETICAL WORKS

VOL. I.


[Illustration: _Elizabeth Barrett Moulton-Barrett._
_at the age of nine._
_Engraved by G. Cooke from a Drawing by Charles Hayter._
London: Published by Smith, Elder & C^o. 15. Waterloo Place.]




PREFATORY NOTE.


In a recent "Memoir of Elizabeth Barrett Browning," by John H. Ingram,
it is observed that "such essays on her personal history as have
appeared, either in England or elsewhere, are replete with mistakes or
misstatements." For these he proposes to substitute "a correct if short
memoir:" but, kindly and appreciative as may be Mr. Ingram's
performance, there occur not a few passages in it equally "mistaken and
misstated."

1. "Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of Edward Moulton Barrett, was born
in London on the 4th of March, 1809." Elizabeth was born, March 6, 1806,
at Coxhoe Hall, county of Durham, the residence of her father.[A]
"Before she was eleven she composed an epic on 'Marathon.'" She was then
fourteen.

2. "It is said that Mr. Barrett was a man of intellect and culture, and
therefore able to direct his daughter's education, but be that so or
not, he obtained for her the tutorial assistance of the well-known Greek
scholar Hugh Stuart Boyd ... who was also a writer of fluent verse: and
his influence and instruction doubtless confirmed Miss Barrett in her
poetical aspirations." Mr. Boyd, early deprived of sight from
over-study, resided at Malvern, and cared for little else than Greek
literature, especially that of the "Fathers." He was about or over
fifty, stooped a good deal, and was nearly bald. His daily habit was to
sit for hours before a table, treating it as a piano with his fingers,
and reciting Greek--his memory for which was such that, on a folio
column of his favourite St. Gregory being read to him, he would repeat
it without missing a syllable. Elizabeth, then residing in
Herefordshire, visited him frequently, partly from her own love of
Greek, and partly from a desire for the congenial society of one to whom
her attendance might be helpful. There was nothing in the least
"tutorial" in this relation--merely the natural feeling of a girl for a
blind and disabled scholar in whose pursuits she took interest. Her
knowledge of Greek was originally due to a preference for sharing with
her brother Edward in the instruction of his Scottish tutor Mr. M'Swiney
rather than in that of her own governess Mrs. Orme: and at such lessons
she constantly assisted until her brother's departure for the Charter
House--where he had Thackeray for a schoolfellow. In point of fact, she
was self-taught in almost every respect. Mr. Boyd was no writer of
"fluent verse," though he published an unimportant volume, and the
literary sympathies of the friends were exclusively bestowed on Greek.

3. "Edward, the eldest of the family," was Elizabeth's younger by nearly
two years. He and his companions perished, not "just off Teignmouth,"
but in Babbicombe Bay. The bodies drifted up channel, and were recovered
three days after.

4. "Her father's fortune was considerably augmented by his accession to
the property of his only brother Richard, for many years Speaker of the
House of Assembly at Jamaica." Mr. Edward Moulton, by the will of his
grandfather, was directed to affix the name of Barrett to that of
Moulton, upon succeeding to the estates in Jamaica. Richard was his
cousin, and by his death Mr. Barrett did not acquire a shilling. His
only brother was Samuel, sometime M.P. for Richmond. He had also a
sister who died young, the full-length portrait of whom by Sir Thomas
Lawrence (the first exhibited by that painter) is in the possession of
Octavius Moulton-Barrett at Westover, near Calbourne, in the Isle of
Wight. With respect to the "semi-tropical taste" of Mr. Barrett, so
characterised in the "Memoir," it may be mentioned that, on the early
death of his father, he was brought from Jamaica to England when a very
young child, as a ward of the late Chief Baron Lord Abinger, then Mr.
Scarlett, whom he frequently accompanied in his post-chaise when on
Circuit. He was sent to Harrow, but received there so savage a
punishment for a supposed offence ("burning the toast") by the youth
whose "fag" he had become, that he was withdrawn from the school by his
mother, and the delinquent was expelled. At the age of sixteen he was
sent by Mr. Scarlett to Cambridge, and thence, for an early marriage,
went to Northumberland. After purchasing the estate in Herefordshire, he
gave himself up assiduously to the usual duties and occupations of a
country gentleman,--farmed largely, was an active magistrate, became for
a year High Sheriff, and in all county contests busied himself as a
Liberal. He had a fine taste for landscape-gardening, planted
considerably, loved trees--almost as much as his friend, the early
correspondent of his daughter, Sir Uvedale Price--and for their sake
discontinued keeping deer in the park.

Many other particulars concerning other people, in other "Biographical
Memoirs which have appeared in England or elsewhere" for some years
past, are similarly "mistaken and misstated:" but they seem better left
without notice by anybody.

                                                                 R. B.
  29 DE VERE GARDENS, W.
      _December 10, 1887._

FOOTNOTE:

[A] The entry in the Parish Register of Kelloe Church is as follows:--
Elizabeth Barrett Moulton Barrett, daughter and first child of Edward
Barrett Moulton Barrett, of Coxhoe Hall, native of St James's, Jamaica,
by Mary, late Clarke, native of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, was born, March
6th, 1806, and baptized 10th of February, 1808.


[Illustration: COXHOE HALL, COUNTY OF DURHAM.
THE BIRTHPLACE OF MRS. BROWNING.]




Dedication

_TO MY FATHER_


_When your eyes fall upon this page of dedication, and you start to see
to whom it is inscribed, your first thought will be of the time far off
when I was a child and wrote verses, and when I dedicated them to you
who were my public and my critic. Of all that such a recollection
implies of saddest and sweetest to both of us, it would become neither
of us to speak before the world, nor would it be possible for us to
speak of it to one another, with voices that did not falter. Enough,
that what is in my heart when I write thus, will be fully known to
yours._

_And my desire is that you, who are a witness how if this art of poetry
had been a less earnest object to me, it must have fallen from exhausted
hands before this day,--that you, who have shared with me in things
bitter and sweet, softening or enhancing them, every day,--that you, who
hold with me, over all sense of loss and transiency, one hope by one
Name,--may accept from me the inscription of these volumes, the
exponents of a few years of an existence which has been sustained and
comforted by you as well as given. Somewhat more faint-hearted than I
used to be, it is my fancy thus to seem to return to a visible personal
dependence on you, as if indeed I were a child again; to conjure your
beloved image between myself and the public, so as to be sure of one
smile,--and to satisfy my heart while I sanctify my ambition, by
associating with the great pursuit of my life, its tenderest and holiest
affection._

                                                     _Your_
                                                            _E. B. B._
  LONDON: 50 WIMPOLE STREET,
            1844.




PREFACE

TO THE FIRST COLLECTED EDITION OF MRS. BROWNING'S POEMS.


The collection here offered to the public consists of Poems which have
been written in the interim between the period of the publication of my
"Seraphim" and the present; variously coloured, or perhaps shadowed, by
the life of which they are the natural expression,--and, with the
exception of a few contributions to English or American periodicals, are
printed now for the first time.

As the first poem of this collection, the "Drama of Exile," is the
longest and most important work (to _me_!) which I ever trusted into the
current of publication, I may be pardoned for entreating the reader's
attention to the fact, that I decided on publishing it after
considerable hesitation and doubt. The subject of the Drama rather
fastened on me than was chosen; and the form, approaching the model of
the Greek tragedy, shaped itself under my hand, rather by force of
pleasure than of design. But when the excitement of composition had
subsided, I felt afraid of my position. My subject was the new and
strange experience of the fallen humanity, as it went forth from
Paradise into the wilderness; with a peculiar reference to Eve's
allotted grief, which, considering that self-sacrifice belonged to her
womanhood, and the consciousness of originating the Fall to her
offence,--appeared to me imperfectly apprehended hitherto, and more
expressible by a woman than a man. There was room, at least, for lyrical
emotion in those first steps into the wilderness,--in that first sense
of desolation after wrath,--in that first audible gathering of the
recriminating "groan of the whole creation,"--in that first darkening of
the hills from the recoiling feet of angels,--and in that first silence
of the voice of God. And I took pleasure in driving in, like a pile,
stroke upon stroke, the Idea of EXILE,--admitting Lucifer as an extreme
Adam, to represent the ultimate tendencies of sin and loss,--that it
might be strong to bear up the contrary idea of the Heavenly love and
purity. But when all was done, I felt afraid, as I said before, of my
position. I had promised my own prudence to shut close the gates of Eden
between Milton and myself, so that none might say I dared to walk in his
footsteps. He should be within, I thought, with his Adam and Eve
unfallen or falling,--and I, without, with my EXILES,--_I_ also an
exile! It would not do. The subject, and his glory covering it, swept
through the gates, and I stood full in it, against my will, and contrary
to my vow,--till I shrank back fearing, almost desponding; hesitating to
venture even a passing association with our great poet before the face
of the public. Whether at last I took courage for the venture, by a
sudden revival of that love of manuscript which should be classed by
moral philosophers among the natural affections, or by the encouraging
voice of a dear friend, it is not interesting to the reader to inquire.
Neither could the fact affect the question; since I bear, of course, my
own responsibilities. For the rest, Milton is too high, and I am too
low, to render it necessary for me to disavow any rash emulation of his
divine faculty on his own ground; while enough individuality will be
granted, I hope, to my poem, to rescue me from that imputation of
plagiarism which should be too servile a thing for every sincere
thinker. After all, and at the worst, I have only attempted, in respect
to Milton, what the Greek dramatists achieved lawfully in respect to
Homer. They constructed dramas on Trojan ground; they raised on the
buskin and even clasped with the sock, the feet of Homeric heroes; yet
they neither imitated their Homer nor emasculated him. The Agamemnon of
AEschylus, who died in the bath, did no harm to, nor suffered any harm
from, the Agamemnon of Homer who bearded Achilles. To this analogy--the
more favourable to me from the obvious exception in it, that Homer's
subject was his own possibly by creation,--whereas Milton's was his own
by illustration only,--I appeal. To this analogy--_not_ to this
comparison, be it understood--I appeal. For the analogy of the stronger
may apply to the weaker; and the reader may have patience with the
weakest while she suggests the application.

On a graver point I must take leave to touch, in further reference to my
dramatic poem. The divine Saviour is represented in vision towards the
close, speaking and transfigured; and it has been hinted to me that the
introduction may give offence in quarters where I should be most
reluctant to give any. A reproach of the same class, relating to the
frequent recurrence of a Great Name in my pages, has already filled me
with regret. How shall I answer these things? Frankly, in any case. When
the old mysteries represented the Holiest Being in a rude familiar
fashion, and the people gazed on, with the faith of children in their
earnest eyes, the critics of a succeeding age, who rejoiced in Congreve,
cried out "Profane." Yet Andreini's mystery suggested Milton's epic; and
Milton, the most reverent of poets, doubting whether to throw his work
into the epic form or the dramatic, left, on the latter basis, a rough
ground-plan, in which his intention of introducing the "Heavenly Love"
among the persons of his drama is extant to the present day. But the
tendency of the present day is to sunder the daily life from the
spiritual creed,--to separate the worshipping from the acting man,--and
by no means to "live by faith." There is a feeling abroad which appears
to me (I say it with deference) nearer to superstition than to religion,
that there should be no touching of holy vessels except by consecrated
fingers, nor any naming of holy names except in consecrated places. As
if life were not a continual sacrament to man, since Christ brake the
daily bread of it in His hands! As if the name of God did not build a
church, by the very naming of it! As if the word God were not,
everywhere in His creation, and at every moment in His eternity, an
appropriate word! As if it could be uttered unfitly, if devoutly! I
appeal on these points, which I will not argue, from the conventions of
the Christian to his devout heart; and I beseech him generously to
believe of me that I have done that in reverence from which, through
reverence, he might have abstained; and that where he might have been
driven to silence by the principle of adoration, I, by the very same
principle, have been hurried into speech.

It should have been observed in another place,--the fact, however, being
sufficiently obvious throughout the drama,--that the time is from the
evening into the night. If it should be objected that I have lengthened
my twilight too much for the East, I might hasten to answer that we know
nothing of the length of mornings or evenings before the Flood, and that
I cannot, for my own part, believe in an Eden without the longest of
purple twilights. The evening, =erev=, of Genesis signifies a
"mingling," and approaches the meaning of our "twilight" analytically.
Apart from which considerations, my "exiles" are surrounded, in the
scene described, by supernatural appearances; and the shadows that
approach them are not only of the night.

The next longest poem to the "Drama of Exile," in the collection, is the
"Vision of Poets," in which I have endeavoured to indicate the necessary
relations of genius to suffering and self-sacrifice. In the eyes of the
living generation, the poet is at once a richer and poorer man than he
used to be; he wears better broadcloth, but speaks no more oracles: and
the evil of this social incrustation over a great idea is eating deeper
and more fatally into our literature than either readers or writers may
apprehend fully. I have attempted to express in this poem my view of the
mission of the poet, of the self-abnegation implied in it, of the great
work involved in it, of the duty and glory of what Balzac has
beautifully and truly called "la patience angelique du genie;" and of
the obvious truth, above all, that if knowledge is power, suffering
should be acceptable as a part of knowledge. It is enough to say of the
other poems, that scarcely one of them is unambitious of an object and a
significance.

Since my "Seraphim" was received by the public with more kindness than
its writer had counted on, I dare not rely on having put away the faults
with which that volume abounded and was mildly reproached. Something
indeed I may hope to have retrieved, because some progress in mind and
in art every active thinker and honest writer must consciously or
unconsciously make, with the progress of existence and experience: and,
in some sort--since "we learn in suffering what we teach in song,"--my
songs may be fitter to teach. But if it were not presumptuous language
on the lips of one to whom life is more than usually uncertain, my
favourite wish for this work would be, that it be received by the public
as a step in the right track, towards a future indication of more value
and acceptability. I would fain do better,--and I feel as if I might do
better: I aspire to do better. It is no new form of the nympholepsy of
poetry, that my ideal should fly before me:--and if I cry out too
hopefully at sight of the white vesture receding between the cypresses,
let me be blamed gently if justly. In any case, while my poems are full
of faults,--as I go forward to my critics and confess,--they have my
heart and life in them,--they are not empty shells. If it must be said
of me that I have contributed immemorable verses to the many rejected by
the age, it cannot at least be said that I have done so in a light and
irresponsible spirit. Poetry has been as serious a thing to me as life
itself; and life has been a very serious thing: there has been no
playing at skittles for me in either. I never mistook pleasure for the
final cause of poetry; nor leisure, for the hour of the poet. I have
done my work, so far, as work,--not as mere hand and head work, apart
from the personal being,--but as the completest expression of that being
to which I could attain,--and as work I offer it to the public,--feeling
its shortcomings more deeply than any of my readers, because measured
from the height of my aspiration,--but feeling also that the reverence
and sincerity with which the work was done should give it some
protection with the reverent and sincere.

  LONDON: 50 WIMPOLE STREET,
            1844.




ADVERTISEMENT.


This edition, including my earlier and later writings, I have
endeavoured to render as little unworthy as possible of the indulgence
of the public. Several poems I would willingly have withdrawn, if it
were not almost impossible to extricate what has been once caught and
involved in the machinery of the press. The alternative is a request to
the generous reader that he may use the weakness of those earlier
verses, which no subsequent revision has succeeded in strengthening,
less as a reproach to the writer, than as a means of marking some
progress in her other attempts.

                                                              E. B. B.
  LONDON, 1856.




CONTENTS.


                                                                  PAGE

  A DRAMA OF EXILE.                                                  1

  THE SERAPHIM.
    PART THE FIRST                                                 107
    PART THE SECOND                                                121
    EPILOGUE                                                       150

  PROMETHEUS BOUND. FROM THE GREEK OR AESCHYLUS                     153

  A LAMENT FOR ADONIS. FROM THE GREEK OF BION                      213

  A VISION OF POETS                                                223

  THE POET'S VOW.
    PART THE FIRST                                                 277
    PART THE SECOND                                                284
    PART THE THIRD                                                 292
    PART THE FOURTH                                                295
    PART THE FIFTH                                                 300




A DRAMA OF EXILE


_PERSONS._

  CHRIST, _in a Vision._

  ADAM.

  EVE.

  GABRIEL.

  LUCIFER.

  _Angels, Eden Spirits, Earth Spirits, and Phantasms._




A DRAMA OF EXILE.


SCENE--_The outer side of the gate of Eden shut fast with cloud, from
the depth of which revolves a sword of fire self-moved. ADAM and EVE are
seen, in the distance flying along the glare._

  LUCIFER, _alone._

  Rejoice in the clefts of Gehenna,
    My exiled, my host!
  Earth has exiles as hopeless as when a
    Heaven's empire was lost.
  Through the seams of her shaken foundations,
    Smoke up in great joy!
  With the smoke of your fierce exultations
    Deform and destroy!
  Smoke up with your lurid revenges,
    And darken the face
  Of the white heavens and taunt them with changes
    From glory and grace.
  We, in falling, while destiny strangles,
    Pull down with us all.
  Let them look to the rest of their angels!
    Who's safe from a fall?
  HE saves not. Where's Adam? Can pardon
    Requicken that sod?
  Unkinged is the King of the Garden,
    The image of God.
  Other exiles are cast out of Eden,--
    More curse has been hurled:
  Come up, O my locusts, and feed in
    The green of the world!
  Come up! we have conquered by evil;
    Good reigns not alone:
  _I_ prevail now, and, angel or devil,
    Inherit a throne.

[_In sudden apparition a watch of innumerable Angels, rank above rank,
slopes up from around the gate to the zenith. The Angel GABRIEL
descends._

  _Lucifer._ Hail, Gabriel, the keeper of the gate!
  Now that the fruit is plucked, prince Gabriel,
  I hold that Eden is impregnable
  Under thy keeping.

  _Gabriel._            Angel of the sin,
  Such as thou standest,--pale in the drear light
  Which rounds the rebel's work with Maker's wrath
  Thou shalt be an Idea to all souls,
  A monumental melancholy gloom
  Seen down all ages, whence to mark despair
  And measure out the distances from good.
  Go from us straightway!

  _Lucifer._                  Wherefore?

  _Gabriel._                               Lucifer,
  Thy last step in this place trod sorrow up.
  Recoil before that sorrow, if not this sword.
  _Lucifer._ Angels are in the world--wherefore not I?
  Exiles are in the world--wherefore not I?
  The cursed are in the world--wherefore not I?

  _Gabriel._ Depart!

  _Lucifer._     And where's the logic of 'depart'?
  Our lady Eve had half been satisfied
  To obey her Maker, if I had not learnt
  To fix my postulate better. Dost thou dream
  Of guarding some monopoly in heaven
  Instead of earth? Why, I can dream with thee
  To the length of thy wings.

  _Gabriel._                   I do not dream.
  This is not heaven, even in a dream, nor earth,
  As earth was once, first breathed among the stars,
  Articulate glory from the mouth divine,
  To which the myriad spheres thrilled audibly,
  Touched like a lute-string, and the sons of God
  Said AMEN, singing it. I know that this
  Is earth not new created but new cursed--
  This, Eden's gate not opened but built up
  With a final cloud of sunset. Do I dream?
  Alas, not so! this is the Eden lost
  By Lucifer the serpent; this the sword
  (This sword alive with justice and with fire)
  That smote, upon the forehead, Lucifer
  The angel. Wherefore, angel, go--depart!
  Enough is sinned and suffered.

  _Lucifer._                       By no means.
  Here's a brave earth to sin and suffer on.
  It holds fast still--it cracks not under curse;
  It holds like mine immortal. Presently
  We'll sow it thick enough with graves as green
  Or greener certes, than its knowledge-tree.
  We'll have the cypress for the tree of life,
  More eminent for shadow: for the rest,
  We'll build it dark with towns and pyramids,
  And temples, if it please you:--we'll have feasts
  And funerals also, merrymakes and wars,
  Till blood and wine shall mix and run along
  Right o'er the edges. And, good Gabriel
  (Ye like that word in heaven), _I_ too have strength--
  Strength to behold Him and not worship Him,
  Strength to fall from Him and not cry on Him,
  Strength to be in the universe and yet
  Neither God nor his servant. The red sign
  Burnt on my forehead, which you taunt me with,
  Is God's sign that it bows not unto God,
  The potter's mark upon his work, to show
  It rings well to the striker. I and the earth
  Can bear more curse.

  _Gabriel._               O miserable earth,
  O ruined angel!

  _Lucifer._         Well, and if it be!
  I CHOSE this ruin, I elected it
  Of my will, not of service. What I do,
  I do volitient, not obedient,
  And overtop thy crown with my despair
  My sorrow crowns me. Get thee back to heaven,
  And leave me to the earth, which is mine own
  In virtue of her ruin, as I hers
  In virtue of my revolt! Turn thou from both
  That bright, impassive, passive angelhood,
  And spare to read us backward any more
  Of the spent hallelujahs!

  _Gabriel._                Spirit of scorn,
  I might say, of unreason! I might say,
  That who despairs, acts; that who acts, connives
  With God's relations set in time and space;
  That who elects, assumes a something good
  Which God made possible; that who lives, obeys
  The law of a Life-maker ...

  _Lucifer._                Let it pass!
  No more, thou Gabriel! What if I stand up
  And strike my brow against the crystalline
  Roofing the creatures,--shall I say, for that,
  My stature is too high for me to stand,--
  Henceforward I must sit? Sit _thou_!

  _Gabriel._                           I kneel.

  _Lucifer._ A heavenly answer. Get thee to thy heaven,
  And leave my earth to me!

  _Gabriel._                  Through heaven and earth
  God's will moves freely, and I follow it,
  As colour follows light. He overflows
  The firmamental walls with deity,
  Therefore with love; his lightnings go abroad,
  His pity may do so, his angels must,
  Whene'er he gives them charges.

  _Lucifer._                        Verily,
  I and my demons, who are spirits of scorn,
  Might hold this charge of standing with a sword
  'Twixt man and his inheritance, as well
  As the benignest angel of you all.

  _Gabriel._ Thou speakest in the shadow of thy change.
  If thou hadst gazed upon the face of God
  This morning for a moment, thou hadst known
  That only pity fitly can chastise:
  Hate but avenges.

  _Lucifer._        As it is, I know
  Something of pity. When I reeled in heaven,
  And my sword grew too heavy for my grasp,
  Stabbing through matter, which it could not pierce
  So much as the first shell of,--toward the throne;
  When I fell back, down,--staring up as I fell,--
  The lightnings holding open my scathed lids,
  And that thought of the infinite of God,
  Hurled after to precipitate descent;
  When countless angel faces still and stern
  Pressed out upon me from the level heavens
  Adown the abysmal spaces, and I fell
  Trampled down by your stillness, and struck blind
  By the sight within your eyes,--'twas then I knew
  How ye could pity, my kind angelhood!

  _Gabriel._ Alas, discrowned one, by the truth in me
  Which God keeps in me, I would give away
  All--save that truth and his love keeping it,--
  To lead thee home again into the light
  And hear thy voice chant with the morning stars,
  When their rays tremble round them with much song
  Sung in more gladness!

  _Lucifer._                 Sing, my Morning Star!
  Last beautiful, last heavenly, that I loved!
  If I could drench thy golden locks with tears,
  What were it to this angel?

  _Gabriel._                   What love is.
  And now I have named God.

  _Lucifer._                    Yet, Gabriel,
  By the lie in me which I keep myself,
  Thou'rt a false swearer. Were it otherwise,
  What dost thou here, vouchsafing tender thoughts
  To that earth-angel or earth-demon--which,
  Thou and I have not solved the problem yet
  Enough to argue,--that fallen Adam there,--
  That red-clay and a breath,--who must, forsooth,
  Live in a new apocalypse of sense,
  With beauty and music waving in his trees
  And running in his rivers, to make glad
  His soul made perfect?--is it not for hope,
  A hope within thee deeper than thy truth,
  Of finally conducting him and his
  To fill the vacant thrones of me and mine,
  Which affront heaven with their vacuity?

  _Gabriel._ Angel, there are no vacant thrones in heaven
  To suit thy empty words. Glory and life
  Fulfil their own depletions; and if God
  Sighed you far from him, his next breath drew in
  A compensative splendour up the vast,
  Flushing the starry arteries.

  _Lucifer._                 What a change!
  So, let the vacant thrones and gardens too
  Fill as may please you!--and be pitiful,
  As ye translate that word, to the dethroned
  And exiled, man or angel. The fact stands,
  That I, the rebel, the cast out and down,
  Am here and will not go; while there, along
  The light to which ye flash the desert out,
  Flies your adopted Adam, your red-clay
  In two kinds, both being flawed. Why, what is this?
  Whose work is this? Whose hand was in the work?
  Against whose hand? In this last strife, methinks,
  I am not a fallen angel!

  _Gabriel._                 Dost thou know
  Aught of those exiles?

  _Lucifer._                Ay: I know they have fled
  Silent all day along the wilderness:
  I know they wear, for burden on their backs,
  The thought of a shut gate of Paradise,
  And faces of the marshalled cherubim
  Shining against, not for them; and I know
  They dare not look in one another's face,--
  As if each were a cherub!

  _Gabriel._                 Dost thou know
  Aught of their future?

  _Lucifer._              Only as much as this:
  That evil will increase and multiply
  Without a benediction.

  _Gabriel._                Nothing more?

  _Lucifer._ Why so the angels taunt! What should be more?

  _Gabriel._ God is more.

  _Lucifer._               Proving what?

  _Gabriel._                             That he is God,
  And capable of saving. Lucifer,
  I charge thee by the solitude he kept
  Ere he created,--leave the earth to God!

  _Lucifer._ My foot is on the earth, firm as my sin.

  _Gabriel._ I charge thee by the memory of heaven
  Ere any sin was done,--leave earth to God!

  _Lucifer._ My sin is on the earth, to reign thereon.

  _Gabriel._ I charge thee by the choral song we sang,
  When up against the white shore of our feet
  The depths of the creation swelled and brake,--
  And the new worlds, the beaded foam and flower
  Of all that coil, roared outward into space
  On thunder-edges,--leave the earth to God!

  _Lucifer._ My woe is on the earth, to curse thereby.

  _Gabriel._ I charge thee by that mournful Morning Star
  Which trembles ...

  _Lucifer._             Enough spoken. As the pine
  In norland forest drops its weight of snows
  By a night's growth, so, growing toward my ends
  I drop thy counsels. Farewell, Gabriel!
  Watch out thy service; I achieve my will.
  And peradventure in the after years,
  When thoughtful men shall bend their spacious brows
  Upon the storm and strife seen everywhere
  To ruffle their smooth manhood and break up
  With lurid lights of intermittent hope
  Their human fear and wrong,--they may discern
  The heart of a lost angel in the earth.


CHORUS OF EDEN SPIRITS

(_chanting from Paradise, while ADAM and EVE fly across the
Sword-glare_).

  Hearken, oh hearken! let your souls behind you
          Turn, gently moved!
  Our voices feel along the Dread to find you,
          O lost, beloved!
  Through the thick-shielded and strong-marshalled angels,
          They press and pierce:
  Our requiems follow fast on our evangels,--
          Voice throbs in verse.
  We are but orphaned spirits left in Eden
          A time ago:
  God gave us golden cups, and we were bidden
          To feed you so.
  But now our right hand hath no cup remaining,
          No work to do,
  The mystic hydromel is spilt, and staining
          The whole earth through.
  Most ineradicable stains, for showing
          (Not interfused!)
  That brighter colours were the world's forgoing,
          Than shall be used.
  Hearken, oh hearken! ye shall hearken surely
          For years and years,
  The noise beside you, dripping coldly, purely,
          Of spirits' tears.
  The yearning to a beautiful denied you
          Shall strain your powers;
  Ideal sweetnesses shall overglide you,
          Resumed from ours.
  In all your music, our pathetic minor
          Your ears shall cross;
  And all good gifts shall mind you of diviner,
          With sense of loss.
  We shall be near you in your poet-languors
          And wild extremes,
  What time ye vex the desert with vain angers,
          Or mock with dreams.
  And when upon you, weary after roaming,
          Death's seal is put,
  By the foregone ye shall discern the coming,
          Through eyelids shut.

  _Spirits of the Trees._
      Hark! the Eden trees are stirring,
      Soft and solemn in your hearing!
      Oak and linden, palm and fir,
      Tamarisk and juniper,
      Each still throbbing in vibration
      Since that crowning of creation
      When the God-breath spake abroad,
      _Let us make man like to God!_
      And the pine stood quivering
        As the awful word went by,
      Like a vibrant music-string
        Stretched from mountain-peak to sky;
      And the platan did expand
        Slow and gradual, branch and head;
        And the cedar's strong black shade
      Fluttered brokenly and grand:
      Grove and wood were swept aslant
      In emotion jubilant.

  _Voice of the same, but softer._
      Which divine impulsion cleaves
      In dim movements to the leaves
      Dropt and lifted, dropt and lifted,
      In the sunlight greenly sifted,--
      In the sunlight and the moonlight
        Greenly sifted through the trees.
        Ever wave the Eden trees
      In the nightlight and the noonlight,
      With a ruffling of green branches
      Shaded off to resonances,
        Never stirred by rain or breeze.
      Fare ye well, farewell!
      The sylvan sounds, no longer audible,
      Expire at Eden's door.
        Each footstep of your treading
      Treads out some murmur which ye heard before.
        Farewell! the trees of Eden
      Ye shall hear nevermore.

  _River Spirits._
      Hark! the flow of the four rivers--
          Hark the flow!
      How the silence round you shivers,
          While our voices through it go,
      Cold and clear.

  _A softer Voice._
      Think a little, while ye hear,
          Of the banks
      Where the willows and the deer
          Crowd in intermingled ranks,
      As if all would drink at once
      Where the living water runs!--
          Of the fishes' golden edges
          Flashing in and out the sedges;
      Of the swans on silver thrones,
          Floating down the winding streams
      With impassive eyes turned shoreward
      And a chant of undertones,--
      And the lotos leaning forward
          To help them into dreams!
      Fare ye well, farewell!
      The river-sounds, no longer audible,
          Expire at Eden's door.
          Each footstep of your treading
      Treads out some murmur which ye heard before.
          Farewell! the streams of Eden
          Ye shall hear nevermore.

  _Bird Spirit._
        I am the nearest nightingale
            That singeth in Eden after you;
            And I am singing loud and true,
        And sweet,--I do not fail.
            I sit upon a cypress bough,
        Close to the gate, and I fling my song
        Over the gate and through the mail
      Of the warden angels marshalled strong,--
        Over the gate and after you.
    And the warden angels let it pass,
    Because the poor brown bird, alas,
      Sings in the garden, sweet and true.
    And I build my song of high pure notes,
      Note over note, height over height,
      Till I strike the arch of the Infinite,
    And I bridge abysmal agonies
    With strong, clear calms of harmonies,--
    And something abides, and something floats,
    In the song which I sing after you.
    Fare ye well, farewell!
    The creature-sounds, no longer audible,
        Expire at Eden's door.
        Each footstep of your treading
    Treads out some cadence which ye heard before.
        Farewell! the birds of Eden,
        Ye shall hear nevermore.

  _Flower Spirits._
      We linger, we linger,
        The last of the throng,
      Like the tones of a singer
        Who loves his own song.
      We are spirit-aromas
        Of blossom and bloom.
      We call your thoughts home,--as
        Ye breathe our perfume,--
      To the amaranth's splendour
        Afire on the slopes;
      To the lily-bells tender,
        And grey heliotropes;
      To the poppy-plains keeping
        Such dream-breath and blee
      That the angels there stepping
        Grew whiter to see:
      To the nook, set with moly,
        Ye jested one day in,
      Till your smile waxed too holy
        And left your lips praying:
      To the rose in the bower-place,
        That dripped o'er you sleeping;
      To the asphodel flower-place,
        Ye walked ankle-deep in.
      We pluck at your raiment,
        We stroke down your hair,
      We faint in our lament
        And pine into air.
      Fare ye well, farewell!
    The Eden scents, no longer sensible,
      Expire at Eden's door.
      Each footstep of your treading
    Treads out some fragrance which ye knew before.
        Farewell! the flowers of Eden,
        Ye shall smell nevermore.

[_There is silence. ADAM and EVE fly on, and never look back. Only a
colossal shadow, as of the dark Angel passing quickly, is cast upon
the Sword-glare._

       *       *       *       *       *

SCENE.--_The extremity of the Sword-glare._

  _Adam._ Pausing a moment on this outer edge
  Where the supernal sword-glare cuts in light
  The dark exterior desert,--hast thou strength,
  Beloved, to look behind us to the gate?

  _Eve._ Have I not strength to look up to thy face?

  _Adam._ We need be strong: yon spectacle of cloud
  Which seals the gate up to the final doom,
  Is God's seal manifest. There seem to lie
  A hundred thunders in it, dark and dead;
  The unmolten lightnings vein it motionless;
  And, outward from its depth, the self-moved sword
  Swings slow its awful gnomon of red fire
  From side to side, in pendulous horror slow,
  Across the stagnant ghastly glare thrown flat
  On the intermediate ground from that to this.
  The angelic hosts, the archangelic pomps,
  Thrones, dominations, princedoms, rank on rank,
  Rising sublimely to the feet of God,
  On either side and overhead the gate,
  Show like a glittering and sustained smoke
  Drawn to an apex. That their faces shine
  Betwixt the solemn clasping of their wings
  Clasped high to a silver point above their heads,--
  We only guess from hence, and not discern.

  _Eve._ Though we were near enough to see them shine,
  The shadow on thy face were awfuller,
  To me, at least,--to me--than all their light.

  _Adam._ What is this, Eve? thou droppest heavily
  In a heap earthward, and thy body heaves
  Under the golden floodings of thine hair!

  _Eve._ O Adam, Adam! by that name of Eve--
  Thine Eve, thy life--which suits me little now,
  Seeing that I now confess myself thy death
  And thine undoer, as the snake was mine,--
  I do adjure thee, put me straight away,
  Together with my name! Sweet, punish me!
  O Love, be just! and, ere we pass beyond
  The light cast outward by the fiery sword,
  Into the dark which earth must be to us,
  Bruise my head with thy foot,--as the curse said
  My seed shall the first tempter's! strike with curse,
  As God struck in the garden! and as HE,
  Being satisfied with justice and with wrath,
  Did roll his thunder gentler at the close,--
  Thou, peradventure, mayst at last recoil
  To some soft need of mercy. Strike, my lord!
  _I_, also, after tempting, writhe on the ground,
  And I would feed on ashes from thine hand,
  As suits me, O my tempted!

  _Adam._                      My beloved,
  Mine Eve and life--I have no other name
  For thee or for the sun than what ye are,
  My utter life and light! If we have fallen,
  It is that we have sinned,--we: God is just;
  And, since his curse doth comprehend us both,
  It must be that his balance holds the weights
  Of first and last sin on a level. What!
  Shall I who had not virtue to stand straight
  Among the hills of Eden, here assume
  To mend the justice of the perfect God,
  By piling up a curse upon his curse,
  Against thee--thee?

  _Eve._                For so, perchance, thy God,
  Might take thee into grace for scorning me;
  Thy wrath against the sinner giving proof
  Of inward abrogation of the sin:
  And so, the blessed angels might come down
  And walk with thee as erst,--I think they would,--
  Because I was not near to make them sad
  Or soil the rustling of their innocence.

  _Adam._ They know me. I am deepest in the guilt,
  If last in the transgression.

  _Eve._                Thou!

  _Adam._                            If God,
  Who gave the right and joyaunce of the world
  Both unto thee and me,--gave thee to me,
  The best gift last, the last sin was the worst,
  Which sinned against more complement of gifts
  And grace of giving. God! I render back
  Strong benediction and perpetual praise
  From mortal feeble lips (as incense-smoke,
  Out of a little censer, may fill heaven),
  That thou, in striking my benumbed hands
  And forcing them to drop all other boons
  Of beauty and dominion and delight,--
  Hast left this well-beloved Eve, this life
  Within life, this best gift between their palms,
  In gracious compensation!

  _Eve._                       Is it thy voice?
  Or some saluting angel's--calling home
  My feet into the garden?

  _Adam._                    O my God!
  I, standing here between the glory and dark,--
  The glory of thy wrath projected forth
  From Eden's wall, the dark of our distress
  Which settles a step off in that drear world--
  Lift up to thee the hands from whence hath fallen
  Only creation's sceptre,--thanking thee
  That rather thou hast cast me out with _her_
  Than left me lorn of her in Paradise,
  With angel looks and angel songs around
  To show the absence of her eyes and voice,
  And make society full desertness
  Without her use in comfort!

  _Eve._                     Where is loss?
  Am I in Eden? can another speak
  Mine own love's tongue?

  _Adam._                     Because with _her_, I stand
  Upright, as far as can be in this fall,
  And look away from heaven which doth accuse,
  And look away from earth which doth convict,
  Into her face, and crown my discrowned brow
  Out of her love, and put the thought of her
  Around me, for an Eden full of birds,
  And lift her body up--thus--to my heart,
  And with my lips upon her lips,--thus, thus,--
  Do quicken and sublimate my mortal breath
  Which cannot climb against the grave's steep sides
  But overtops this grief.

  _Eve._                   I am renewed.
  My eyes grow with the light which is in thine;
  The silence of my heart is full of sound.
  Hold me up--so! Because I comprehend
  This human love, I shall not be afraid
  Of any human death; and yet because
  I know this strength of love, I seem to know
  Death's strength by that same sign. Kiss on my lips,
  To shut the door close on my rising soul,--
  Lest it pass outwards in astonishment
  And leave thee lonely!

  _Adam._                   Yet thou liest, Eve,
  Bent heavily on thyself across mine arm,
  Thy face flat to the sky.

  _Eve._                    Ay, and the tears
  Running, as it might seem, my life from me,
  They run so fast and warm. Let me lie so,
  And weep so, as if in a dream or prayer,
  Unfastening, clasp by clasp, the hard tight thought
  Which clipped my heart and showed me evermore
  Loathed of thy justice as I loathe the snake,
  And as the pure ones loathe our sin. To-day,
  All day, beloved, as we fled across
  This desolating radiance cast by swords
  Not suns,--my lips prayed soundless to myself,
  Striking against each other--"O Lord God!"
  ('Twas so I prayed) "I ask Thee by my sin,
  "And by thy curse, and by thy blameless heavens,
  "Make dreadful haste to hide me from thy face
  "And from the face of my beloved here
  "For whom I am no helpmeet, quick away
  "Into the new dark mystery of death!
  "I will lie still there, I will make no plaint,
  "I will not sigh, nor sob, nor speak a word,
  "Nor struggle to come back beneath the sun
  "Where peradventure I might sin anew
  "Against thy mercy and his pleasure. Death,
  "O death, whatever it be, is good enough
  "For such as I am: while for Adam here,
  "No voice shall say again, in heaven or earth,
  "_It is not good for him to be alone_."

  _Adam._ And was it good for such a prayer to pass,
  My unkind Eve, betwixt our mutual lives?
  If I am exiled, must I be bereaved?

  _Eve._ 'Twas an ill prayer: it shall be prayed no more;
  And God did use it like a foolishness,
  Giving no answer. Now my heart has grown
  Too high and strong for such a foolish prayer,
  Love makes it strong and since I was the first
  In the transgression, with a steady foot
  I will be first to tread from this sword-glare
  Into the outer darkness of the waste,--
  And thus I do it.

  _Adam._            Thus I follow thee,
  As erewhile in the sin.--What sounds! what sounds!
  I feel a music which comes straight from heaven,
  As tender as a watering dew.

  _Eve._                        I think
  That angels--not those guarding Paradise,--
  But the love-angels, who came erst to us,
  And when we said 'GOD,' fainted unawares
  Back from our mortal presence unto God,
  (As if he drew them inward in a breath)
  His name being heard of them,--I think that they
  With sliding voices lean from heavenly towers,
  Invisible but gracious. Hark--how soft!


CHORUS OF INVISIBLE ANGELS.

_Faint and tender._

    Mortal man and woman,
      Go upon your travel!
    Heaven assist the human
      Smoothly to unravel
    All that web of pain
      Wherein ye are holden.
    Do ye know our voices
      Chanting down the Golden?
    Do ye guess our choice is,
      Being unbeholden,
    To be hearkened by you yet again?

    This pure door of opal
      God hath shut between us,--
    Us, his shining people,
      You, who once have seen us
    And are blinded new!
      Yet, across the doorway,
    Past the silence reaching,
      Farewells evermore may,
    Blessing in the teaching,
      Glide from us to you.

  _First Semichorus._
    Think how erst your Eden,
    Day on day succeeding,
      With our presence glowed.
    We came as if the Heavens were bowed
      To a milder music rare.
    Ye saw us in our solemn treading,
      Treading down the steps of cloud,
    While our wings, outspreading
      Double calms of whiteness,
      Dropped superfluous brightness
    Down from stair to stair.

  _Second Semichorus._
    Or oft, abrupt though tender,
      While ye gazed on space,
    We flashed our angel-splendour
      In either human face.
    With mystic lilies in our hands,
    From the atmospheric bands
      Breaking with a sudden grace,
    We took you unaware!
      While our feet struck glories
    Outward, smooth and fair,
      Which we stood on floorwise,
    Platformed in mid-air.

  _First Semichorus._
    Or oft, when Heaven-descended,
      Stood we in our wondering sight
      In a mute apocalypse
      With dumb vibrations on our lips
    From hosannas ended,
      And grand half-vanishings
      Of the empyreal things
        Within our eyes belated,
    Till the heavenly Infinite
      Falling off from the Created,
    Left our inward contemplation
    Opened into ministration.

  _Chorus._
    Then upon our axle turning
      Of great joy to sympathy,
    We sang out the morning
      Broadening up the sky,
        Or we drew
        Our music through
  The noontide's hush and heat and shine,
  Informed with our intense Divine:
    Interrupted vital notes
      Palpitating hither, thither,
      Burning out into the aether,
    Sensible like fiery motes.
    Or, whenever twilight drifted
      Through the cedar masses,
    The globed sun we lifted,
    Trailing purple, trailing gold
      Out between the passes
    Of the mountains manifold,
      To anthems slowly sung:
    While he,--aweary, half in swoon
    For joy to hear our climbing tune
    Transpierce the stars' concentric rings,--
      The burden of his glory flung
    In broken lights upon our wings.

[_The chant dies away confusedly, and LUCIFER appears._

  _Lucifer._ Now may all fruits be pleasant to thy lips,
  Beautiful Eve! The times have somewhat changed
  Since thou and I had talk beneath a tree,
  Albeit ye are not gods yet.
  _Eve._                     Adam! hold
  My right hand strongly! It is Lucifer--
  And we have love to lose.

  _Adam._                   I' the name of God,
  Go apart from us, O thou Lucifer!
  And leave us to the desert thou hast made
  Out of thy treason. Bring no serpent-slime
  Athwart this path kept holy to our tears!
  Or we may curse thee with their bitterness.

  _Lucifer._ Curse freely! curses thicken. Why, this Eve
  Who thought me once part worthy of her ear
  And somewhat wiser than the other beasts,--
  Drawing together her large globes of eyes,
  The light of which is throbbing in and out
  Their steadfast continuity of gaze,--
  Knots her fair eyebrows in so hard a knot,
  And down from her white heights of womanhood
  Looks on me so amazed,--I scarce should fear
  To wager such an apple as she plucked
  Against one riper from the tree of life,
  That she could curse too--as a woman may--
  Smooth in the vowels.

  _Eve._                   So--speak wickedly!
  I like it best so. Let thy words be wounds,--
  For, so, I shall not fear thy power to hurt.
  Trench on the forms of good by open ill--
  For, so, I shall wax strong and grand with scorn,
  Scorning myself for ever trusting thee
  As far as thinking, ere a snake ate dust,
  He could speak wisdom.

  _Lucifer._                Our new gods, it seems,
  Deal more in thunders than in courtesies.
  And, sooth, mine own Olympus, which anon
  I shall build up to loud-voiced imagery
  From all the wandering visions of the world,
  May show worse railing than our lady Eve
  Pours o'er the rounding of her argent arm.
  But why should this be? Adam pardoned Eve.

  _Adam._ Adam loved Eve. Jehovah pardon both!

  _Eve._ Adam forgave Eve--because loving Eve.

  _Lucifer._ So, well. Yet Adam was undone of Eve,
  As both were by the snake. Therefore forgive,
  In like wise, fellow-temptress, the poor snake--
  Who stung there, not so poorly!

[_Aside._

  _Eve._                        Hold thy wrath,
  Beloved Adam! let me answer him;
  For this time he speaks truth, which we should hear,
  And asks for mercy, which I most should grant,
  In like wise, as he tells us--in like wise!
  And therefore I thee pardon, Lucifer,
  As freely as the streams of Eden flowed
  When we were happy by them. So, depart;
  Leave us to walk the remnant of our time
  Out mildly in the desert. Do not seek
  To harm us any more or scoff at us,
  Or ere the dust be laid upon our face,
  To find there the communion of the dust
  And issue of the dust,--Go!

  _Adam._                    At once, go!

  _Lucifer._ Forgive! and go! Ye images of clay,
  Shrunk somewhat in the mould,--what jest is this?
  What words are these to use? By what a thought
  Conceive ye of me? Yesterday--a snake!
  To-day--what?

  _Adam._         A strong spirit.

  _Eve._                          A sad spirit.

  _Adam._ Perhaps a fallen angel.--Who shall say!

  _Lucifer._ Who told thee, Adam?

  _Adam._                       Thou! The prodigy
  Of thy vast brows and melancholy eyes
  Which comprehend the heights of some great fall.
  I think that thou hast one day worn a crown
  Under the eyes of God.

  _Lucifer._             And why of God?

  _Adam._ It were no crown else. Verily, I think
  Thou'rt fallen far. I had not yesterday
  Said it so surely, but I know to-day
  Grief by grief, sin by sin.

  _Lucifer._             A crown, by a crown.

  _Adam._ Ay, mock me! now I know more than I knew:
  Now I know that thou art fallen below hope
  Of final re-ascent.

  _Lucifer._         Because?

  _Adam._                       Because
  A spirit who expected to see God
  Though at the last point of a million years,
  Could dare no mockery of a ruined man
  Such as this Adam.

  _Lucifer._            Who is high and bold--
  Be it said passing!--of a good red clay
  Discovered on some top of Lebanon,
  Or haply of Aornus, beyond sweep
  Of the black eagle's wing! A furlong lower
  Had made a meeker king for Eden. Soh!
  Is it not possible, by sin and grief
  (To give the things your names) that spirits should rise
  Instead of falling?

  _Adam._            Most impossible.
  The Highest being the Holy and the Glad,
  Whoever rises must approach delight
  And sanctity in the act.

  _Lucifer._               Ha, my clay-king!
  Thou wilt not rule by wisdom very long
  The after generations. Earth, methinks,
  Will disinherit thy philosophy
  For a new doctrine suited to thine heirs,
  And class these present dogmas with the rest
  Of the old-world traditions, Eden fruits
  And Saurian fossils.

  _Eve._                Speak no more with him,
  Beloved! it is not good to speak with him.
  Go from us, Lucifer, and speak no more!
  We have no pardon which thou dost not scorn,
  Nor any bliss, thou seest, for coveting,
  Nor innocence for staining. Being bereft,
  We would be alone.--Go!

  _Lucifer._                    Ah! ye talk the same,
  All of you--spirits and clay--go, and depart!
  In Heaven they said so, and at Eden's gate,
  And here, reiterant, in the wilderness.
  None saith, Stay with me, for thy face is fair!
  None saith, Stay with me, for thy voice is sweet!
  And yet I was not fashioned out of clay.
  Look on me, woman! Am I beautiful?

  _Eve._ Thou hast a glorious darkness.

  _Lucifer._                           Nothing more?

  _Eve._ I think, no more.

  _Lucifer._         False Heart--thou thinkest more!
  Thou canst not choose but think, as I praise God,
  Unwillingly but fully, that I stand
  Most absolute in beauty. As yourselves
  Were fashioned very good at best, so _we_
  Sprang very beauteous from the creant Word
  Which thrilled behind us, God himself being moved
  When that august work of a perfect shape,
  His dignities of sovran angel-hood,
  Swept out into the universe,--divine
  With thunderous movements, earnest looks of gods,
  And silver-solemn clash of cymbal wings.
  Whereof was I, in motion and in form,
  A part not poorest. And yet,--yet, perhaps,
  This beauty which I speak of, is not here,
  As God's voice is not here, nor even my crown--
  I do not know. What is this thought or thing
  Which I call beauty? Is it thought, or thing?
  Is it a thought accepted for a thing?
  Or both? or neither?--a pretext--a word?
  Its meaning flutters in me like a flame
  Under my own breath, my perceptions reel
  For evermore around it, and fall off,
  As if it too were holy.

  _Eve._              Which it is.

  _Adam._ The essence of all beauty, I call love.
  The attribute, the evidence, and end,
  The consummation to the inward sense,
  Of beauty apprehended from without,
  I still call love. As form, when colourless,
  Is nothing to the eye,--that pine-tree there,
  Without its black and green, being all a blank,--
  So, without love, is beauty undiscerned
  In man or angel. Angel! rather ask
  What love is in thee, what love moves to thee,
  And what collateral love moves on with thee;
  Then shalt thou know if thou art beautiful.

  _Lucifer._ Love! what is love? I lose it. Beauty and love
  I darken to the image. Beauty--love!

[_He fades away, while a low music sounds._

  _Adam._ Thou art pale, Eve.

  _Eve._                           The precipice of ill
  Down this colossal nature, dizzies me:
  And, hark! the starry harmony remote
  Seems measuring the heights from whence he fell.

  _Adam._ Think that we have not fallen so! By the hope
  And aspiration, by the love and faith,
  We do exceed the stature of this angel.

  _Eve._ Happier we are than he is, by the death.

  _Adam._ Or rather, by the life of the Lord God!
  How dim the angel grows, as if that blast
  Of music swept him back into the dark.

[_The music is stronger, gathering itself into uncertain articulation_

  _Eve._ It throbs in on us like a plaintive heart,
  Pressing, with slow pulsations, vibrative,
  Its gradual sweetness through the yielding air,
  To such expression as the stars may use,
  Most starry-sweet and strange! With every note
  That grows more loud, the angel grows more dim,
  Receding in proportion to approach,
  Until he stand afar,--a shade.

  _Adam._                 Now, words.


SONG OF THE MORNING STAR TO LUCIFER.

_He fades utterly away and vanishes, as it proceeds._

      Mine orbed image sinks
        Back from thee, back from thee,
      As thou art fallen, methinks,
        Back from me, back from me.
          O my light-bearer,
          Could another fairer
          Lack to thee, lack to thee?
            Ah, ah, Heosphoros!
  I loved thee with the fiery love of stars
  Who love by burning, and by loving move,
  Too near the throned Jehovah not to love.
            Ah, ah, Heosphoros!
  Their brows flash fast on me from gliding cars,
      Pale-passioned for my loss.
            Ah, ah, Heosphoros!

        Mine orbed heats drop cold
          Down from thee, down from thee,
        As fell thy grace of old
          Down from me, down from me,
            O my light-bearer,
            Is another fairer
          Won to thee, won to thee?
            Ah, ah, Heosphoros,
            Great love preceded loss,
          Known to thee, known to thee.
                Ah, ah!
  Thou, breathing thy communicable grace
            Of life into my light,
  Mine astral faces, from thine angel face,
              Hast inly fed,
  And flooded me with radiance overmuch
              From thy pure height.
                    Ah, ah!
  Thou, with calm, floating pinions both ways spread,
        Erect, irradiated,
        Didst sting my wheel of glory
        On, on before thee
  Along the Godlight by a quickening touch!
                    Ha, ha!
  Around, around the firmamental ocean
  I swam expanding with delirious fire!
  Around, around, around, in blind desire
  To be drawn upward to the Infinite--
                    Ha, ha!

  Until, the motion flinging out the motion
    To a keen whirl of passion and avidity,
  To a dim whirl of languor and delight,
  I wound in gyrant orbits smooth and white
        With that intense rapidity.
        Around, around,
        I wound and interwound,
  While all the cyclic heavens about me spun.
  Stars, planets, suns, and moons dilated broad,
  Then flashed together into a single sun,
  And wound, and wound in one:
  And as they wound I wound,--around, around,
  In a great fire I almost took for God.
           Ha, ha, Heosphoros!

    Thine angel glory sinks
      Down from me, down from me--
    My beauty falls, methinks,
      Down from thee, down from thee!
        O my light-bearer,
        O my path-preparer,
      Gone from me, gone from me!
          Ah, ah, Heosphoros!
  I cannot kindle underneath the brow
  Of this new angel here, who is not thou.
  All things are altered since that time ago,--
  And if I shine at eve, I shall not know.
         I am strange--I am slow.
           Ah, ah, Heosphoros!
  Henceforward, human eyes of lovers be
  The only sweetest sight that I shall see,
  With tears between the looks raised up to me.
                  Ah, ah!
  When, having wept all night, at break of day
  Above the folded hills they shall survey
  My light, a little trembling, in the grey.
                     Ah, ah!
  And gazing on me, such shall comprehend,
    Through all my piteous pomp at morn or even
    And melancholy leaning out of heaven,
  That love, their own divine, may change or end,
         That love may close in loss!
              Ah, ah, Heosphoros!

       *       *       *       *       *

SCENE.--_Farther on. A wild open country seen vaguely in the approaching
night._

  _Adam._ How doth the wide and melancholy earth
  Gather her hills around us, grey and ghast,
  And stare with blank significance of loss
  Right in our faces! Is the wind up?

  _Eve._                               Nay.

  _Adam._ And yet the cedars and the junipers
  Rock slowly through the mist, without a sound,
  And shapes which have no certainty of shape
  Drift duskly in and out between the pines,
  And loom along the edges of the hills,
  And lie flat, curdling in the open ground--
  Shadows without a body, which contract
  And lengthen as we gaze on them.

  _Eve._                         O life
  Which is not man's nor angel's! What is this?

  _Adam._ No cause for fear. The circle of God's life
  Contains all life beside.

  _Eve._                   I think the earth
  Is crazed with curse, and wanders from the sense
  Of those first laws affixed to form and space
  Or ever she knew sin.

  _Adam._               We will not fear;
  We were brave sinning.

  _Eve._                   Yea, I plucked the fruit
  With eyes upturned to heaven and seeing there
  Our god-thrones, as the tempter said,--not GOD.
  My heart, which beat then, sinks. The sun hath sunk
  Out of sight with our Eden.

  _Adam._                     Night is near.

  _Eve._ And God's curse, nearest. Let us travel back
  And stand within the sword-glare till we die,
  Believing it is better to meet death
  Than suffer desolation.

  _Adam._               Nay, beloved!
  We must not pluck death from the Maker's hand,
  As erst we plucked the apple: we must wait
  Until he gives death as he gave us life,
  Nor murmur faintly o'er the primal gift
  Because we spoilt its sweetness with our sin.

  _Eve._ Ah, ah! dost thou discern what I behold?

  _Adam._ I see all. How the spirits in thine eyes
  From their dilated orbits bound before
  To meet the spectral Dread!

  _Eve._                         I am afraid--
  Ah, ah! the twilight bristles wild with shapes
  Of intermittent motion, aspect vague
  And mystic bearings, which o'ercreep the earth,
  Keeping slow time with horrors in the blood.
  How near they reach ... and far! How grey they move--
  Treading upon the darkness without feet,
  And fluttering on the darkness without wings!
  Some run like dogs, with noses to the ground;
  Some keep one path, like sheep; some rock like trees;
  Some glide like a fallen leaf, and some flow on
  Copious as rivers.

  _Adam._            Some spring up like fire;
  And some coil ...

  _Eve._         Ah, ah! dost thou pause to say
  Like what?--coil like the serpent, when he fell
  From all the emerald splendour of his height
  And writhed, and could not climb against the curse,
  Not a ring's length. I am afraid--afraid--
  I think it is God's will to make me afraid,--
  Permitting THESE to haunt us in the place
  Of his beloved angels--gone from us
  Because we are not pure. Dear Pity of God,
  That didst permit the angels to go home
  And live no more with us who are not pure,
  Save _us_ too from a loathly company--
  Almost as loathly in our eyes, perhaps,
  As _we_ are in the purest! Pity us--
  Us too! nor shut us in the dark, away
  From verity and from stability,
  Or what we name such through the precedence
  Of earth's adjusted uses,--leave us not
  To doubt betwixt our senses and our souls,
  Which are the more distraught and full of pain
  And weak of apprehension!

  _Adam._                      Courage, Sweet!
  The mystic shapes ebb back from us, and drop
  With slow concentric movement, each on each,--
  Expressing wider spaces,--and collapsed
  In lines more definite for imagery
  And clearer for relation, till the throng
  Of shapeless spectra merge into a few
  Distinguishable phantasms vague and grand
  Which sweep out and around us vastily
  And hold us in a circle and a calm.

  _Eve._ Strange phantasms of pale shadow! there are twelve.
  Thou who didst name all lives, hast names for these?

  _Adam._ Methinks this is the zodiac of the earth,
  Which rounds us with a visionary dread,
  Responding with twelve shadowy signs of earth,
  In fantasque apposition and approach,
  To those celestial, constellated twelve
  Which palpitate adown the silent nights
  Under the pressure of the hand of God
  Stretched wide in benediction. At this hour,
  Not a star pricketh the flat gloom of heaven:
  But, girdling close our nether wilderness,
  The zodiac-figures of the earth loom slow,--
  Drawn out, as suiteth with the place and time,
  In twelve colossal shades instead of stars,
  Through which the ecliptic line of mystery
  Strikes bleakly with an unrelenting scope,
  Foreshowing life and death.

  _Eve._                         By dream or sense,
  Do we see this?

  _Adam._           Our spirits have climbed high
  By reason of the passion of our grief,
  And, from the top of sense, looked over sense
  To the significance and heart of things
  Rather than things themselves.

  _Eve._                   And the dim twelve....

  _Adam._ Are dim exponents of the creature-life
  As earth contains it. Gaze on them, beloved!
  By stricter apprehension of the sight,
  Suggestions of the creatures shall assuage
  The terror of the shadows,--what is known
  Subduing the unknown and taming it
  From all prodigious dread. That phantasm, there,
  Presents a lion, albeit twenty times
  As large as any lion--with a roar
  Set soundless in his vibratory jaws,
  And a strange horror stirring in his mane.
  And, there, a pendulous shadow seems to weigh--
  Good against ill, perchance; and there, a crab
  Puts coldly out its gradual shadow-claws,
  Like a slow blot that spreads,--till all the ground,
  Crawled over by it, seems to crawl itself.
  A bull stands horned here with gibbous glooms;
  And a ram likewise: and a scorpion writhes
  Its tail in ghastly slime and stings the dark.
  This way a goat leaps with wild blank of beard;
  And here, fantastic fishes duskly float,
  Using the calm for waters, while their fins
  Throb out quick rhythms along the shallow air.
  While images more human----

  _Eve._                         How he stands,
  That phantasm of a man--who is not _thou_!
  Two phantasms of two men!

  _Adam._                    One that sustains,
  And one that strives,--resuming, so, the ends
  Of manhood's curse of labour.[B] Dost thou see
  That phantasm of a woman?

  _Eve._                         I have seen;
  But look off to those small humanities[C]
  Which draw me tenderly across my fear,--
  Lesser and fainter than my womanhood,
  Or yet thy manhood--with strange innocence
  Set in the misty lines of head and hand.
  They lean together! I would gaze on them
  Longer and longer, till my watching eyes,
  As the stars do in watching anything,
  Should light them forward from their outline vague
  To clear configuration.

[_Two Spirits, of Organic and Inorganic Nature, arise from the
ground._

                           But what Shapes
  Rise up between us in the open space,
  And thrust me into horror, back from hope!

  _Adam._ Colossal Shapes--twin sovran images,
  With a disconsolate, blank majesty
  Set in their wondrous faces! with no look,
  And yet an aspect--a significance
  Of individual life and passionate ends,
  Which overcomes us gazing.
                             O bleak sound,
  O shadow of sound, O phantasm of thin sound!
  How it comes, wheeling as the pale moth wheels,
  Wheeling and wheeling in continuous wail
  Around the cyclic zodiac, and gains force,
  And gathers, settling coldly like a moth,
  On the wan faces of these images
  We see before us,--whereby modified,
  It draws a straight line of articulate song
  From out that spiral faintness of lament,
  And, by one voice, expresses many griefs.

  _First Spirit._
  I am the spirit of the harmless earth.
    God spake me softly out among the stars,
  As softly as a blessing of much worth;
    And then his smile did follow unawares,
  That all things fashioned so for use and duty
  Might shine anointed with his chrism of beauty--
                 Yet I wail!
  I drave on with the worlds exultingly,
    Obliquely down the Godlight's gradual fall;
  Individual aspect and complexity
    Of gyratory orb and interval
  Lost in the fluent motion of delight
  Toward the high ends of Being beyond sight--
                 Yet I wail!

  _Second Spirit._
  I am the spirit of the harmless beasts,
    Of flying things, and creeping things, and swimming;
  Of all the lives, erst set at silent feasts,
    That found the love-kiss on the goblet brimming,
  And tasted in each drop within the measure
  The sweetest pleasure of their Lord's good pleasure--
                 Yet I wail!
  What a full hum of life around his lips
    Bore witness to the fulness of creation!
  How all the grand words were full-laden ships
    Each sailing onward from enunciation
  To separate existence,--and each bearing
  The creature's power of joying, hoping, fearing!
                 Yet I wail!

  _Eve._ They wail, beloved! they speak of glory and God,
  And they wail--wail. That burden of the song
  Drops from it like its fruit, and heavily falls
  Into the lap of silence.

  _Adam._                   Hark, again!

  _First Spirit._
  I was so beautiful, so beautiful,
    My joy stood up within me bold to add
  A word to God's,--and, when His work was full,
    To "very good" responded "very glad!"
  Filtered through roses did the light enclose me,
  And bunches of the grape swam blue across me--
                 Yet I wail!

  _Second Spirit._
  I bounded with my panthers: I rejoiced
    In my young tumbling lions rolled together:
  My stag, the river at his fetlocks, poised
    Then dipped his antlers through the golden weather
  In the same ripple which the alligator
  Left, in his joyous troubling of the water--
                 Yet I wail!

  _First Spirit._
  O my deep waters, cataract and flood,
    What wordless triumph did your voices render
  O mountain-summits, where the angels stood
    And shook from head and wing thick dews of splendour!
  How, with a holy quiet, did your Earthy
  Accept that Heavenly, knowing ye were worthy!
                 Yet I wail!

  _Second Spirit._
  O my wild wood-dogs, with your listening eyes!
    My horses--my ground-eagles, for swift fleeing!
  My birds, with viewless wings of harmonies,
    My calm cold fishes of a silver being,
  How happy were ye, living and possessing,
  O fair half-souls capacious of full blessing!
                 Yet I wail!

  _First Spirit._
  I wail, I wail! Now hear my charge to-day,
    Thou man, thou woman, marked as the misdoers
  By God's sword at your backs! I lent my clay
    To make your bodies, which had grown more flowers:
  And now, in change for what I lent, ye give me
  The thorn to vex, the tempest-fare to cleave me--
                 And I wail!

  _Second Spirit._
  I wail, I wail! Behold ye that I fasten
    My sorrow's fang upon your souls dishonoured?
  Accursed transgressors! down the steep ye hasten,--
    Your crown's weight on the world, to drag it downward
  Unto your ruin. Lo! my lions, scenting
  The blood of wars, roar hoarse and unrelenting--
                 And I wail!

  _First Spirit._
  I wail, I wail! Do you hear that I wail?
    I had no part in your transgression--none.
  My roses on the bough did bud not pale,
    My rivers did not loiter in the sun;
  _I_ was obedient. Wherefore in my centre
  Do I thrill at this curse of death and winter?--
                 Do I wail?

  _Second Spirit._
  I wail, I wail! I wail in the assault
    Of undeserved perdition, sorely wounded!
  My nightingale sang sweet without a fault,
    My gentle leopards innocently bounded.
  _We_ were obedient. What is this convulses
  Our blameless life with pangs and fever pulses?
                 And I wail!

  _Eve._ I choose God's thunder and His angels' swords
  To die by, Adam, rather than such words.
  Let us pass out and flee.

  _Adam._                    We cannot flee.
  This zodiac of the creatures' cruelty
  Curls round us, like a river cold and drear,
  And shuts us in, constraining us to hear.

  _First Spirit._
  I feel your steps, O wandering sinners, strike
    A sense of death to me, and undug graves!
  The heart of earth, once calm, is trembling like
    The ragged foam along the ocean-waves:
  The restless earthquakes rock against each other;
  The elements moan 'round me--"Mother, mother"--
                 And I wail!

  _Second Spirit._
  Your melancholy looks do pierce me through;
    Corruption swathes the paleness of your beauty.
  Why have ye done this thing? What did we do
    That we should fall from bliss as ye from duty?
  Wild shriek the hawks, in waiting for their jesses,
  Fierce howl the wolves along the wildernesses--
                 And I wail!

  _Adam._ To thee, the Spirit of the harmless earth,
  To thee, the Spirit of earth's harmless lives,
  Inferior creatures but still innocent,
  Be salutation from a guilty mouth
  Yet worthy of some audience and respect
  From you who are not guilty. If we have sinned,
  God hath rebuked us, who is over us
  To give rebuke or death, and if ye wail
  Because of any suffering from our sin,
  Ye who are under and not over us,
  Be satisfied with God, if not with us,
  And pass out from our presence in such peace
  As we have left you, to enjoy revenge
  Such as the heavens have made you. Verily,
  There must be strife between us, large as sin.

  _Eve._ No strife, mine Adam! Let us not stand high
  Upon the wrong we did to reach disdain,
  Who rather should be humbler evermore
  Since self-made sadder. Adam! shall I speak--
  I who spake once to such a bitter end--
  Shall I speak humbly now who once was proud?
  I, schooled by sin to more humility
  Than thou hast, O mine Adam, O my king--
  _My_ king, if not the world's?

  _Adam._                  Speak as thou wilt.

  _Eve._ Thus, then--my hand in thine--
                        ... Sweet, dreadful Spirits!
  I pray you humbly in the name of God,
  Not to say of these tears, which are impure--
  Grant me such pardoning grace as can go forth
  From clean volitions toward a spotted will,
  From the wronged to the wronger, this and no more!
  I do not ask more. I am 'ware, indeed,
  That absolute pardon is impossible
  From you to me, by reason of my sin,--
  And that I cannot evermore, as once,
  With worthy acceptation of pure joy,
  Behold the trances of the holy hills
  Beneath the leaning stars, or watch the vales
  Dew-pallid with their morning ecstasy,--
  Or hear the winds make pastoral peace between
  Two grassy uplands,--and the river-wells
  Work out their bubbling mysteries underground,--
  And all the birds sing, till for joy of song
  They lift their trembling wings as if to heave
  The too-much weight of music from their heart
  And float it up the aether. I am 'ware
  That these things I can no more apprehend
  With a pure organ into a full delight,--
  The sense of beauty and of melody
  Being no more aided in me by the sense
  Of personal adjustment to those heights
  Of what I see well-formed or hear well-tuned,
  But rather coupled darkly and made ashamed
  By my percipiency of sin and fall
  In melancholy of humiliant thoughts.
  But, oh! fair, dreadful Spirits--albeit this
  Your accusation must confront my soul,
  And your pathetic utterance and full gaze
  Must evermore subdue me,--be content!
  Conquer me gently--as if pitying me,
  Not to say loving! let my tears fall thick
  As watering dews of Eden, unreproached;
  And when your tongues reprove me, make me smooth,
  Not ruffled--smooth and still with your reproof,
  And peradventure better while more sad!
  For look to it, sweet Spirits, look well to it,
  It will not be amiss in you who kept
  The law of your own righteousness, and keep
  The right of your own griefs to mourn themselves,--
  To pity me twice fallen, from that, and this,
  From joy of place, and also right of wail,
  "I wail" being not for me--only "I sin."
  Look to it, O sweet Spirits!
                                 For was I not,
  At that last sunset seen in Paradise,
  When all the westering clouds flashed out in throngs
  Of sudden angel-faces, face by face,
  All hushed and solemn, as a thought of God
  Held them suspended,--was I not, that hour,
  The lady of the world, princess of life,
  Mistress of feast and favour? Could I touch
  A rose with my white hand, but it became
  Redder at once? Could I walk leisurely
  Along our swarded garden, but the grass
  Tracked me with greenness? Could I stand aside
  A moment underneath a cornel-tree,
  But all the leaves did tremble as alive
  With songs of fifty birds who were made glad
  Because I stood there? Could I turn to look
  With these twain eyes of mine, now weeping fast,
  Now good for only weeping,--upon man,
  Angel, or beast, or bird, but each rejoiced
  Because I looked on him? Alas, alas!
  And is not this much woe, to cry "alas!"
  Speaking of joy? And is not this more shame,
  To have made the woe myself, from all that joy?
  To have stretched my hand, and plucked it from the tree,
  And chosen it for fruit? Nay, is not this
  Still most despair,--to have halved that bitter fruit,
  And ruined, so, the sweetest friend I have,
  Turning the GREATEST to mine enemy?

  _Adam._ I will not hear thee speak so. Hearken, Spirits!
  Our God, who is the enemy of none
  But only of their sin, hath set your hope
  And my hope, in a promise, on this Head.
  Show reverence, then, and never bruise her more
  With unpermitted and extreme reproach,--
  Lest, passionate in anguish, she fling down
  Beneath your trampling feet, God's gift to us
  Of sovranty by reason and freewill,
  Sinning against the province of the Soul
  To rule the soulless. Reverence her estate,
  And pass out from her presence with no words!

  _Eve._ O dearest Heart, have patience with my heart!
  O Spirits, have patience, 'stead of reverence,
  And let me speak, for, not being innocent,
  It little doth become me to be proud.
  And I am prescient by the very hope
  And promise set upon me, that henceforth
  Only my gentleness shall make me great,
  My humbleness exalt me. Awful Spirits,
  Be witness that I stand in your reproof
  But one sun's length off from my happiness--
  Happy, as I have said, to look around,
  Clear to look up!--And now! I need not speak--
  Ye see me what I am; ye scorn me so,
  Because ye see me what I have made myself
  From God's best making! Alas,--peace forgone,
  Love wronged, and virtue forfeit, and tears wept
  Upon all, vainly! Alas, me! alas,
  Who have undone myself, from all that best,
  Fairest and sweetest, to this wretchedest
  Saddest and most defiled--cast out, cast down--
  What word metes absolute loss? let absolute loss
  Suffice you for revenge. For _I_, who lived
  Beneath the wings of angels yesterday,
  Wander to-day beneath the roofless world:
  _I_, reigning the earth's empress yesterday,
  Put off from me, to-day, your hate with prayers:
  _I_, yesterday, who answered the Lord God,
  Composed and glad as singing-birds the sun,
  Might shriek now from our dismal desert, "God,"
  And hear him make reply, "What is thy need,
  Thou whom I cursed to-day?"

  _Adam._                      Eve!

  _Eve._                              _I_, at last,
  Who yesterday was helpmate and delight
  Unto mine Adam, am to-day the grief
  And curse-mete for him. And, so, pity us,
  Ye gentle Spirits, and pardon him and me,
  And let some tender peace, made of our pain,
  Grow up betwixt us, as a tree might grow,
  With boughs on both sides! In the shade of which,
  When presently ye shall behold us dead,--
  For the poor sake of our humility,
  Breathe out your pardon on our breathless lips,
  And drop your twilight dews against our brows,
  And stroking with mild airs our harmless hands
  Left empty of all fruit, perceive your love
  Distilling through your pity over us,
  And suffer it, self-reconciled, to pass!

_LUCIFER rises in the circle._

  _Lucifer._ Who talks here of a complement of grief?
  Of expiation wrought by loss and fall?
  Of hate subduable to pity? Eve?
  Take counsel from thy counsellor the snake,
  And boast no more in grief, nor hope from pain,
  My docile Eve! I teach you to despond
  Who taught you disobedience. Look around:--
  Earth spirits and phantasms hear you talk unmoved,
  As if ye were red clay again and talked!
  What are your words to them--your grief to them--
  Your deaths, indeed, to them? Did the hand pause,
  For _their_ sake, in the plucking of the fruit,
  That they should pause for _you_, in hating you?
  Or will your grief or death, as did your sin,
  Bring change upon their final doom? Behold,
  Your grief is but your sin in the rebound,
  And cannot expiate for it.

  _Adam._                     That is true.

  _Lucifer._ Ay, that is true. The clay-king testifies
  To the snake's counsel,--hear him!--very true.

  _Earth Spirits._ I wail, I wail!

  _Lucifer._                    And certes, _that_ is true.
  Ye wail, ye all wail. Peradventure I
  Could wail among you. O thou universe,
  That holdest sin and woe,--more room for wail!

  _Distant Starry Voice._ Ah, ah, Heosphoros! Heosphoros!

  _Adam._ Mark Lucifer! He changes awfully.

  _Eve._ It seems as if he looked from grief to God
  And could not see him. Wretched Lucifer!

  _Adam._ How he stands--yet an angel!

  _Earth Spirits._                    We all wail!

  _Lucifer (after a pause)._ Dost thou remember, Adam, when the curse
  Took us in Eden? On a mountain-peak
  Half-sheathed in primal woods and glittering
  In spasms of awful sunshine at that hour,
  A lion couched, part raised upon his paws,
  With his calm massive face turned full on thine,
  And his mane listening. When the ended curse
  Left silence in the world, right suddenly
  He sprang up rampant and stood straight and stiff,
  As if the new reality of death
  Were dashed against his eyes, and roared so fierce,
  (Such thick carnivorous passion in his throat
  Tearing a passage through the wrath and fear)
  And roared so wild, and smote from all the hills
  Such fast keen echoes crumbling down the vales
  Precipitately,--that the forest beasts,
  One after one, did mutter a response
  Of savage and of sorrowful complaint
  Which trailed along the gorges. Then, at once,
  He fell back, and rolled crashing from the height
  Into the dusk of pines.

  _Adam._                  It might have been.
  I heard the curse alone.

  _Earth Spirits._          I wail, I wail!

  _Lucifer._ That lion is the type of what I am.
  And as he fixed thee with his full-faced hate,
  And roared, O Adam, comprehending doom,
  So, gazing on the face of the Unseen,
  I cry out here between the Heavens and Earth
  My conscience of this sin, this woe, this wrath,
  Which damn me to this depth.

  _Earth Spirits._          I wail, I wail!

  _Eve._ I wail--O God!

  _Lucifer._                I scorn you that ye wail,
  Who use your petty griefs for pedestals
  To stand on, beckoning pity from without,
  And deal in pathos of antithesis
  Of what ye _were_ forsooth, and what ye are;--
  I scorn you like an angel! Yet, one cry
  I, too, would drive up like a column erect,
  Marble to marble, from my heart to heaven,
  A monument of anguish to transpierce
  And overtop your vapoury complaints
  Expressed from feeble woes.

  _Earth Spirits._          I wail, I wail!

  _Lucifer._ For, O ye heavens, ye are my witnesses,
  That _I_, struck out from nature in a blot,
  The outcast and the mildew of things good,
  The leper of angels, the excepted dust
  Under the common rain of daily gifts,--
  I the snake, I the tempter, I the cursed,--
  To whom the highest and the lowest alike
  Say, Go from us--we have no need of thee,--
  Was made by God like others. Good and fair,
  He did create me!--ask him, if not fair!
  Ask, if I caught not fair and silverly
  His blessing for chief angels on my head
  Until it grew there, a crown crystallized!
  Ask, if he never called me by my name,
  _Lucifer_--kindly said as "Gabriel"--
  _Lucifer_--soft as "Michael!" while serene
  I, standing in the glory of the lamps,
  Answered "my Father," innocent of shame
  And of the sense of thunder. Ha! ye think,
  White angels in your niches,--I repent,
  And would tread down my own offences back
  To service at the footstool? _that's_ read wrong!
  I cry as the beast did, that I may cry--
  Expansive, not appealing! Fallen so deep,
  Against the sides of this prodigious pit
  I cry--cry--dashing out the hands of wail
  On each side, to meet anguish everywhere,
  And to attest it in the ecstasy
  And exaltation of a woe sustained
  Because provoked and chosen.
                                 Pass along
  Your wilderness, vain mortals! Puny griefs
  In transitory shapes, be henceforth dwarfed
  To your own conscience, by the dread extremes
  Of what I am and have been. If ye have fallen,
  It is but a step's fall,--the whole ground beneath
  Strewn woolly soft with promise! if ye have sinned,
  Your prayers tread high as angels! if ye have grieved,
  Ye are too mortal to be pitiable,
  The power to die disproves the right to grieve.
  Go to! ye call this ruin? I half-scorn
  The ill I did you! Were ye wronged by me,
  Hated and tempted and undone of me,--
  Still, what's your hurt to mine of doing hurt,
  Of hating, tempting, and so ruining?
  This sword's _hilt_ is the sharpest, and cuts through
  The hand that wields it.
                           Go! I curse you all.
  Hate one another--feebly--as ye can!
  I would not certes cut you short in hate,
  Far be it from me! hate on as ye can!
  I breathe into your faces, spirits of earth,
  As wintry blast may breathe on wintry leaves
  And lifting up their brownness show beneath
  The branches bare. Beseech you, spirits, give
  To Eve who beggarly entreats your love
  For her and Adam when they shall be dead,
  An answer rather fitting to the sin
  Than to the sorrow--as the heavens, I trow,
  For justice' sake gave theirs.
                             I curse you both,
  Adam and Eve. Say grace as after meat,
  After my curses! May your tears fall hot
  On all the hissing scorns o' the creatures here,--
  And yet rejoice! Increase and multiply,
  Ye in your generations, in all plagues,
  Corruptions, melancholies, poverties,
  And hideous forms of life and fears of death,--
  The thought of death being always imminent,
  Immoveable and dreadful in your life,
  And deafly and dumbly insignificant
  Of any hope beyond,--as death itself,
  Whichever of you lieth dead the first,
  Shall seem to the survivor--yet rejoice!
  My curse catch at you strongly, body and soul,
  And HE find no redemption--nor the wing
  Of seraph move your way; and yet rejoice!
  Rejoice,--because ye have not, set in you,
  This hate which shall pursue you--this fire-hate
  Which glares without, because it burns within--
  Which kills from ashes--this potential hate,
  Wherein I, angel, in antagonism
  To God and his reflex beatitudes,
  Moan ever, in the central universe,
  With the great woe of striving against Love--
  And gasp for space amid the Infinite,
  And toss for rest amid the Desertness,
  Self-orphaned by my will, and self-elect
  To kingship of resistant agony
  Toward the Good round me--hating good and love,
  And willing to hate good and to hate love,
  And willing to will on so evermore,
  Scorning the past and damning the to-come--
  Go and rejoice! I curse you.

[_LUCIFER vanishes._

  _Earth Spirits._
      And we scorn you! there's no pardon
        Which can lean to you aright.
      When your bodies take the guerdon
        Of the death-curse in our sight,
  Then the bee that hummeth lowest shall transcend you:
      Then ye shall not move an eyelid
        Though the stars look down your eyes;
      And the earth which ye defiled
        Shall expose you to the skies,--
  "Lo! these kings of ours, who sought to comprehend you."

  _First Spirit._
      And the elements shall boldly
        All your dust to dust constrain.
          Unresistedly and coldly
            I will smite you with my rain.
      From the slowest of my frosts is no receding.

  _Second Spirit._
          And my little worm, appointed
            To assume a royal part,
          He shall reign, crowned and anointed,
            O'er the noble human heart.
      Give him counsel against losing of that Eden!

  _Adam._ Do ye scorn us? Back your scorn
          Toward your faces grey and lorn,
            As the wind drives back the rain,
          Thus I drive with passion-strife,
          I who stand beneath God's sun,
          Made like God, and, though undone,
          Not unmade for love and life.
            Lo! ye utter threats in vain.
          By my free will that chose sin,
          By mine agony within
          Round the passage of the fire,
            By the pinings which disclose
          That my native soul is higher
            Than what it chose,
      We are yet too high, O Spirits, for your disdain!

  _Eve._ Nay, beloved! If these be low,
            We confront them from no height.
          We have stooped down to their level
          By infecting them with evil,
          And their scorn that meets our blow Scathes aright.
          Amen. Let it be so.

  _Earth Spirits._
          We shall triumph--triumph greatly
            When ye lie beneath the sward.
          There, our lily shall grow stately
            Though ye answer not a word,
      And her fragrance shall be scornful of your silence:
          While your throne ascending calmly
            We, in heirdom of your soul,
          Flash the river, lift the palm-tree,
              The dilated ocean roll,
      By the thoughts that throbbed within you, round the islands.

          Alp and torrent shall inherit
            Your significance of will,
          And the grandeur of your spirit
            Shall our broad savannahs fill;
      In our winds, your exultations shall be springing!
          Even your parlance which inveigles,
            By our rudeness shall be won.
          Hearts poetic in our eagles
          Shall beat up against the sun
  And strike downward in articulate clear singing.

        Your bold speeches our Behemoth
          With his thunderous jaw shall wield.
        Your high fancies shall our Mammoth
          Breathe sublimely up the shield
  Of Saint Michael at God's throne, who waits to speed him:
        Till the heavens' smooth-grooved thunder
          Spinning back, shall leave them clear,
        And the angels, smiling wonder,
          With dropt looks from sphere to sphere,
  Shall cry "Ho, ye heirs of Adam! ye exceed him."

  _Adam._ Root out thine eyes, Sweet, from the dreary ground!
  Beloved, we may be overcome by God,
  But not by these.

  _Eve._          By God, perhaps, in these.

  _Adam._ I think, not so. Had God foredoomed despair
  He had not spoken hope. He may destroy
  Certes, but not deceive.

  _Eve._                   Behold this rose!
  I plucked it in our bower of Paradise
  This morning as I went forth, and my heart
  Has beat against its petals all the day.
  I thought it would be always red and full
  As when I plucked it. _Is_ it?--ye may see!
  I cast it down to you that ye may see,
  All of you!--count the petals lost of it,
  And note the colours fainted! ye may see!
  And I am as it is, who yesterday
  Grew in the same place. O ye spirits of earth,
  I almost, from my miserable heart,
  Could here upbraid you for your cruel heart,
  Which will not let me, down the slope of death,
  Draw any of your pity after me,
  Or lie still in the quiet of your looks,
  As my flower, there, in mine.

[_A bleak wind, quickened with indistinct Human Voices, spins around the
Earth-zodiac, filling the circle with its presence; and then, wailing
off into the East, carries the rose away with it. EVE falls upon her
face. ADAM stands erect._

  _Adam._                So, verily,
  The last departs.

  _Eve._          So Memory follows Hope,
  And Life both. Love said to me, "Do not die,"
  And I replied, "O Love, I will not die.
  I exiled and I will not orphan Love."
  But now it is no choice of mine to die:
  My heart throbs from me.

  _Adam._                  Call it straightway back!
  Death's consummation crowns completed life,
  Or comes too early. Hope being set on thee
  For others, if for others then for thee,--
  For thee and me.

[_The wind revolves from the East, and round again to the East, perfumed
by the Eden rose, and full of Voices which sweep out into articulation
as they pass._

                  Let thy soul shake its leaves
  To feel the mystic wind--hark!

  _Eve._                         I hear life.

  _Infant Voices passing in the wind._
        O we live, O we live--
        And this life that we receive
        Is a warm thing and a new,
        Which we softly bud into
        From the heart and from the brain,--
        Something strange that overmuch is
          Of the sound and of the sight,
        Flowing round in trickling touches,
          With a sorrow and delight,--
        Yet is it all in vain?
                        Rock us softly,
        Lest it be all in vain.

  _Youthful Voices passing._
            O we live, O we live--
            And this life that we achieve
            Is a loud thing and a bold
            Which with pulses manifold
            Strikes the heart out full and fain--
            Active doer, noble liver,
              Strong to struggle, sure to conquer,
            Though the vessel's prow will quiver
              At the lifting of the anchor:
            Yet do we strive in vain?

  _Infant Voices passing._
                            Rock us softly,
            Lest it be all in vain.

  _Poet Voices passing._
            O we live, O we live--
            And this life that we conceive
            Is a clear thing and a fair,
            Which we set in crystal air
            That its beauty may be plain!
            With a breathing and a flooding
              Of the heaven-life on the whole,
            While we hear the forests budding
              To the music of the soul--
            Yet is it tuned in vain?

  _Infant Voices passing._
                            Rock us softly,
            Lest it be all in vain.

  _Philosophic Voices passing._
            O we live, O we live--
            And this life that we perceive
            Is a great thing and a grave
            Which for others' use we have,
            Duty-laden to remain.
            We are helpers, fellow-creatures,
              Of the right against the wrong;
            We are earnest-hearted teachers
              Of the truth which maketh strong--
            Yet do we teach in vain?

  _Infant Voices passing._
                            Rock us softly,
            Lest it be all in vain.

  _Revel Voices passing._
            O we live, O we live--
            And this life that we reprieve
            Is a low thing and a light,
            Which is jested out of sight
            And made worthy of disdain!
            Strike with bold electric laughter
              The high tops of things divine--
          Turn thy head, my brother, after,
            Lest thy tears fall in my wine!
          For is all laughed in vain?

  _Infant Voices passing._
                          Rock us softly,
          Lest it be all in vain.

  _Eve._ I hear a sound of life--of life like ours--
  Of laughter and of wailing, of grave speech,
  Of little plaintive voices innocent,
  Of life in separate courses flowing out
  Like our four rivers to some outward main.
  I hear life--life!

  _Adam._             And, so, thy cheeks have snatched
  Scarlet to paleness, and thine eyes drink fast
  Of glory from full cups, and thy moist lips
  Seem trembling, both of them, with earnest doubts
  Whether to utter words or only smile.

  _Eve._ Shall I be mother of the coming life?
  Hear the steep generations, how they fall
  Adown the visionary stairs of Time
  Like supernatural thunders--far, yet near,--
  Sowing their fiery echoes through the hills.
  Am I a cloud to these--mother to these?

  _Earth Spirits._ And bringer of the curse upon all these.

[_EVE sinks down again._

  _Poet Voices passing._
            O we live, O we live--
            And this life that we conceive
            Is a noble thing and high,
            Which we climb up loftily
              To view God without a stain;
            Till, recoiling where the shade is,
              We retread our steps again,
            And descend the gloomy Hades
              To resume man's mortal pain.
            Shall it be climbed in vain?

  _Infant Voices passing._
                            Rock us softly,
            Lest it be all in vain.

  _Love Voices passing._
            O we live, O we live--
            And this life we would retrieve,
            Is a faithful thing apart
            Which we love in, heart to heart,
            Until one heart fitteth twain.
            "Wilt thou be one with me?"
            "I will be one with thee."
            "Ha, ha!--we love and live!"
            Alas! ye love and die.
            Shriek--who shall reply?
            For is it not loved in vain?

  _Infant Voices passing._
                          Rock us softly,
          Though it be all in vain.

  _Aged Voices passing._
          O we live, O we live--
          And this life we would survive,
          Is a gloomy thing and brief,
          Which, consummated in grief,
          Leaveth ashes for all gain.
          Is it not _all_ in vain?

  _Infant Voices passing._
                          Rock us softly,
          Though it be _all_ in vain.

[_Voices die away._

  _Earth Spirits._ And bringer of the curse upon all these.

  _Eve._ The voices of foreshown Humanity
  Die off;--so let me die.

  _Adam._                So let us die,
  When God's will soundeth the right hour of death.

  _Earth Spirits._ And bringer of the curse upon all these.

  _Eve._ O Spirits! by the gentleness ye use
  In winds at night, and floating clouds at noon,
  In gliding waters under lily-leaves,
  In chirp of crickets, and the settling hush
  A bird makes in her nest with feet and wings,--
  Fulfil your natures now!

  _Earth Spirits._         Agreed, allowed!
  We gather out our natures like a cloud,
  And thus fulfil their lightnings! Thus, and thus!
          Hearken, oh hearken to us!

  _First Spirit._
  As the storm-wind blows bleakly from the norland,
  As the snow-wind beats blindly on the moorland,
  As the simoom drives hot across the desert,
  As the thunder roars deep in the Unmeasured.
  As the torrent tears the ocean-world to atoms,
  As the whirlpool grinds it fathoms below fathoms,
        Thus,--and thus!

  _Second Spirit._
  As the yellow toad, that spits its poison chilly,
  As the tiger, in the jungle crouching stilly,
  As the wild boar, with ragged tusks of anger,
  As the wolf-dog, with teeth of glittering clangour,
  As the vultures, that scream against the thunder,
  As the owlets, that sit and moan asunder,
        Thus,--and thus!

  _Eve._ Adam! God!

  _Adam._                Cruel, unrelenting Spirits!
  By the power in me of the sovran soul
  Whose thoughts keep pace yet with the angel's march,
  I charge you into silence--trample you
  Down to obedience. I am king of you!

  _Earth Spirits._
            Ha, ha! thou art king!
            With a sin for a crown,
            And a soul undone!
            Thou, the antagonized,
            Tortured and agonized,
            Held in the ring
            Of the zodiac!
            Now, king, beware!
            We are many and strong
            Whom thou standest among,--
            And we press on the air,
            And we stifle thee back,
            And we multiply where
            Thou wouldst trample us down
            From rights of our own
            To an utter wrong--
        And, from under the feet of thy scorn,
                O forlorn,
            We shall spring up like corn,
            And our stubble be strong.
  _Adam._ God, there is power in thee! I make appeal
  Unto thy kingship.

  _Eve._          There is pity in THEE,
  O sinned against, great God!--My seed, my seed,
  There is hope set on THEE--I cry to thee,
  Thou mystic Seed that shalt be!--leave us not
  In agony beyond what we can bear,
  Fallen in debasement below thunder-mark,
  A mark for scorning--taunted and perplext
  By all these creatures we ruled yesterday,
  Whom thou, Lord, rulest alway! O my Seed,
  Through the tempestuous years that rain so thick
  Betwixt my ghostly vision and thy face,
  Let me have token! for my soul is bruised
  Before the serpent's head is.

[_A vision of CHRIST appears in the midst of the Zodiac, which pales
before the heavenly light. The Earth Spirits grow greyer and fainter._

  CHRIST.               I AM HERE!

  _Adam._ This is God!--Curse us not, God, any more!

  _Eve._ But gazing so--so--with omnific eyes,
  Lift my soul upward till it touch thy feet!
  Or lift it only,--not to seem too proud,--
  To the low height of some good angel's feet,
  For such to tread on when he walketh straight
  And thy lips praise him!

  CHRIST.               Spirits of the earth,
  I meet you with rebuke for the reproach
  And cruel and unmitigated blame
  Ye cast upon your masters. True, they have sinned;
  And true their sin is reckoned into loss
  For you the sinless. Yet, your innocence
  Which of you praises? since God made your acts
  Inherent in your lives, and bound your hands
  With instincts and imperious sanctities
  From self-defacement. Which of you disdains
  These sinners who in falling proved their height
  Above you by their liberty to fall?
  And which of you complains of loss by them,
  For whose delight and use ye have your life
  And honour in creation? Ponder it!
  This regent and sublime Humanity,
  Though fallen, exceeds you! this shall film your sun,
  Shall hunt your lightning to its lair of cloud,
  Turn back your rivers, footpath all your seas,
  Lay flat your forests, master with a look
  Your lion at his fasting, and fetch down
  Your eagle flying. Nay, without this law
  Of mandom, ye would perish,--beast by beast
  Devouring,--tree by tree, with strangling roots
  And trunks set tuskwise. Ye would gaze on God
  With imperceptive blankness up the stars,
  And mutter, "Why, God, hast thou made us thus?"
  And pining to a sallow idiocy
  Stagger up blindly against the ends of life,
  Then stagnate into rottenness and drop
  Heavily--poor, dead matter--piecemeal down
  The abysmal spaces--like a little stone
  Let fall to chaos. Therefore over you
  Receive man's sceptre!--therefore be content
  To minister with voluntary grace
  And melancholy pardon, every rite
  And function in you, to the human hand!
  Be ye to man as angels are to God,
  Servants in pleasure, singers of delight,
  Suggesters to his soul of higher things
  Than any of your highest! So at last,
  He shall look round on you with lids too straight
  To hold the grateful tears, and thank you well,
  And bless you when he prays his secret prayers,
  And praise you when he sings his open songs
  For the clear song-note he has learnt in you
  Of purifying sweetness, and extend
  Across your head his golden fantasies
  Which glorify you into soul from sense.
  Go, serve him for such price! That not in vain
  Nor yet ignobly ye shall serve, I place
  My word here for an oath, mine oath for act
  To be hereafter. In the name of which
  Perfect redemption and perpetual grace,
  I bless you through the hope and through the peace
  Which are mine,--to the Love, which is myself.

  _Eve._ Speak on still, Christ! Albeit thou bless me not
  In set words, I am blessed in hearkening thee--
  Speak, Christ!

  CHRIST.    Speak, Adam! Bless the woman, man!
  It is thine office.

  _Adam._           Mother of the world,
  Take heart before this Presence! Lo, my voice,
  Which, naming erst the creatures, did express
  (God breathing through my breath) the attributes
  And instincts of each creature in its name,
  Floats to the same afflatus,--floats and heaves
  Like a water-weed that opens to a wave,--
  A full leaved prophecy affecting thee,
  Out fairly and wide. Henceforward, arise, aspire
  To all the calms and magnanimities,
  The lofty uses and the noble ends,
  The sanctified devotion and full work,
  To which thou art elect for evermore,
  First woman, wife, and mother!

  _Eve._                        And first in sin.

  _Adam._ And also the sole bearer of the Seed
  Whereby sin dieth. Raise the majesties
  Of thy disconsolate brows, O well-beloved,
  And front with level eyelids the To-come,
  And all the dark o' the world! Rise, woman, rise
  To thy peculiar and best altitudes
  Of doing good and of enduring ill,
  Of comforting for ill, and teaching good,
  And reconciling all that ill and good
  Unto the patience of a constant hope,--
  Rise with thy daughters! If sin came by thee,
  And by sin, death,--the ransom-righteousness,
  The heavenly life and compensative rest
  Shall come by means of thee. If woe by thee
  Had issue to the world, thou shalt go forth
  An angel of the woe thou didst achieve,
  Found acceptable to the world instead
  Of others of that name, of whose bright steps
  Thy deed stripped bare the hills. Be satisfied;
  Something thou hast to bear through womanhood,
  Peculiar suffering answering to the sin,--
  Some pang paid down for each new human life,
  Some weariness in guarding such a life,
  Some coldness from the guarded, some mistrust
  From those thou hast too well served, from those beloved
  Too loyally some treason; feebleness
  Within thy heart, and cruelty without,
  And pressures of an alien tyranny
  With its dynastic reasons of larger bones
  And stronger sinews. But, go to! thy love
  Shall chant itself its own beatitudes
  After its own life-working. A child's kiss
  Set on thy sighing lips shall make thee glad;
  A poor man served by thee shall make thee rich;
  A sick man helped by thee shall make thee strong;
  Thou shalt be served thyself by every sense
  Of service which thou renderest. Such a crown
  I set upon thy head,--Christ witnessing
  With looks of prompting love--to keep thee clear
  Of all reproach against the sin forgone,
  From all the generations which succeed.
  Thy hand which plucked the apple I clasp close,
  Thy lips which spake wrong counsel I kiss close,
  I bless thee in the name of Paradise
  And by the memory of Edenic joys
  Forfeit and lost,--by that last cypress tree,
  Green at the gate, which thrilled as we came out,
  And by the blessed nightingale which threw
  Its melancholy music after us,--
  And by the flowers, whose spirits full of smells
  Did follow softly, plucking us behind
  Back to the gradual banks and vernal bowers
  And fourfold river-courses.--By all these,
  I bless thee to the contraries of these,
  I bless thee to the desert and the thorns,
  To the elemental change and turbulence,
  And to the roar of the estranged beasts,
  And to the solemn dignities of grief,--
  To each one of these ends,--and to their END
  Of Death and the hereafter.

  _Eve._                       I accept
  For me and for my daughters this high part
  Which lowly shall be counted. Noble work
  Shall hold me in the place of garden-rest,
  And in the place of Eden's lost delight
  Worthy endurance of permitted pain;
  While on my longest patience there shall wait
  Death's speechless angel, smiling in the east,
  Whence cometh the cold wind. I bow myself
  Humbly henceforward on the ill I did,
  That humbleness may keep it in the shade.
  Shall it be so? shall I smile, saying so?
  O Seed! O King! O God, who _shalt_ be seed,--
  What shall I say? As Eden's fountains swelled
  Brightly betwixt their banks, so swells my soul
  Betwixt thy love and power!
                               And, sweetest thoughts
  Of forgone Eden! now, for the first time
  Since God said "Adam," walking through the trees,
  I dare to pluck you as I plucked erewhile
  The lily or pink, the rose or heliotrope
  So pluck I you--so largely--with both hands,
  And throw you forward on the outer earth,
  Wherein we are cast out, to sweeten it.

  _Adam._ As thou, Christ, to illume it, holdest Heaven
  Broadly over our heads.

[_The CHRIST is gradually transfigured, during the following phrases of
dialogue, into humanity and suffering._

  _Eve._                    O Saviour Christ,
  Thou standest mute in glory, like the sun!

  _Adam._ We worship in Thy silence, Saviour Christ!

  _Eve._ Thy brows grow grander with a forecast woe,--
  Diviner, with the possible of death.
  We worship in Thy sorrow, Saviour Christ!

  _Adam._ How do Thy clear, still eyes transpierce our souls,
  As gazing _through_ them toward the Father-throne
  In a pathetical, full Deity,
  Serenely as the stars gaze through the air
  Straight on each other!

  _Eve._                    O pathetic Christ,
  Thou standest mute in glory, like the moon!

  CHRIST. Eternity stands alway fronting God;
  A stern colossal image, with blind eyes
  And grand dim lips that murmur evermore
  God, God, God! while the rush of life and death,
  The roar of act and thought, of evil and good,
  The avalanches of the ruining worlds
  Tolling down space,--the new worlds' genesis
  Budding in fire,--the gradual humming growth
  Of the ancient atoms and first forms of earth,
  The slow procession of the swathing seas
  And firmamental waters,--and the noise
  Of the broad, fluent strata of pure airs,--
  All these flow onward in the intervals
  Of that reiterated sound of--GOD!
  Which WORD innumerous angels straightway lift
  Wide on celestial altitudes of song
  And choral adoration, and then drop
  The burden softly, shutting the last notes
  In silver wings. Howbeit in the noon of time
  Eternity shall wax as dumb as Death,
  While a new voice beneath the spheres shall cry,
  "God! why hast thou forsaken me, my God?"
  And not a voice in Heaven shall answer it.

[_The transfiguration is complete in sadness._

  _Adam._ Thy speech is of the Heavenlies, yet, O Christ,
  Awfully human are thy voice and face!

  _Eve._ My nature overcomes me from thine eyes.

  CHRIST. In the set noon of time shall one from Heaven,
  An angel fresh from looking upon God,
  Descend before a woman, blessing her
  With perfect benediction of pure love,
  For all the world in all its elements,
  For all the creatures of earth, air, and sea,
  For all men in the body and in the soul,
  Unto all ends of glory and sanctity.

  _Eve._ O pale, pathetic Christ--I worship thee!
  I thank thee for that woman!

  CHRIST.                  Then, at last,
  I, wrapping round me your humanity,
  Which, being sustained, shall neither break nor burn
  Beneath the fire of Godhead, will tread earth,
  And ransom you and it, and set strong peace
  Betwixt you and its creatures. With my pangs
  I will confront your sins; and since those sins
  Have sunken to all Nature's heart from yours,
  The tears of my clean soul shall follow them
  And set a holy passion to work clear
  Absolute consecration. In my brow
  Of kingly whiteness shall be crowned anew
  Your discrowned human nature. Look on me!
  As I shall be uplifted on a cross
  In darkness of eclipse and anguish dread,
  So shall I lift up in my pierced hands,
  Not into dark, but light--not unto death,
  But life,--beyond the reach of guilt and grief,
  The whole creation. Henceforth in my name
  Take courage, O thou woman,--man, take hope!
  Your grave shall be as smooth as Eden's sward,
  Beneath the steps of your prospective thoughts,
  And, one step past it, a new Eden-gate
  Shall open on a hinge of harmony
  And let you through to mercy. Ye shall fall
  No more, within that Eden, nor pass out
  Any more from it. In which hope, move on,
  First sinners and first mourners! Live and love,--
  Doing both nobly because lowlily!
  Live and work, strongly because patiently!
  And, for the deed of death, trust it to God
  That it be well done, unrepented of,
  And not to loss! And thence, with constant prayers,
  Fasten your souls so high, that constantly
  The smile of your heroic cheer may float
  Above all floods of earthly agonies,
  Purification being the joy of pain!

[_The vision of CHRIST vanishes. ADAM and EVE stand in an ecstasy. The
Earth-zodiac pales away shade by shade, as the stars, star by star,
shine out in the sky; and the following chant from the two Earth
Spirits (as they sweep back into the Zodiac and disappear with it)
accompanies the process of change._

  _Earth Spirits._
          By the mighty word thus spoken
            Both for living and for dying,
          We our homage-oath, once broken,
            Fasten back again in sighing,
  And the creatures and the elements renew their covenanting.

          Here, forgive us all our scorning;
            Here, we promise milder duty:
          And the evening and the morning
            Shall re-organize in beauty
  A sabbath day of sabbath joy, for universal chanting.

          And if, still, this melancholy
            May be strong to overcome us,
          If this mortal and unholy
            We still fail to cast out from us,
  If we turn upon you, unaware, your own dark influences,--

          If ye tremble when surrounded
            By our forest pine and palm trees,
          If we cannot cure the wounded
            With our gum trees and our balm trees,
  And if your souls all mournfully sit down among your senses,--

          Yet, O mortals, do not fear us!
            We are gentle in our languor;
          Much more good ye shall have near us
            Than any pain or anger,
  And our God's refracted blessing in our blessing shall be given.

          By the desert's endless vigil
            We will solemnize your passions,
          By the wheel of the black eagle
            We will teach you exaltations,
  When he sails against the wind, to the white spot up in heaven.

          Ye shall find us tender nurses
            To your weariness of nature,
          And our hands shall stroke the curse's
            Dreary furrows from the creature,
  Till your bodies shall lie smooth in death and straight and slumberful.

          Then, a couch we will provide you
            Where no summer heats shall dazzle,
          Strewing on you and beside you
            Thyme and rosemary and basil,
  And the yew-tree shall grow overhead to keep all safe and cool.

          Till the Holy Blood awaited
            Shall be chrism around us running,
          Whereby, newly-consecrated,
            We shall leap up in God's sunning,
  To join the spheric company which purer worlds assemble:

          While, renewed by new evangels,
            Soul-consummated, made glorious,
          Ye shall brighten past the angels,
            Ye shall kneel to Christ victorious,
  And the rays around his feet beneath your sobbing lips shall tremble.

[_The phantastic Vision has all passed; the Earth-zodiac has broken like
a belt, and is dissolved from the Desert. The Earth Spirits vanish,
and the stars shine out above._


CHORUS OF INVISIBLE ANGELS,

_while ADAM and EVE advance into the Desert, hand in hand._

            Hear our heavenly promise
              Through your mortal passion!
            Love, ye shall have from us,
              In a pure relation.
            As a fish or bird
              Swims or flies, if moving,
            We unseen are heard
              To live on by loving.
            Far above the glances
              Of your eager eyes,
          Listen! we are loving.
          Listen, through man's ignorances--
          Listen, through God's mysteries--
          Listen down the heart of things,
          Ye shall hear our mystic wings
              Murmurous with loving.
              Through the opal door
              Listen evermore
              How we live by loving!

  _First Semichorus._
          When your bodies therefore
            Reach the grave their goal,
          Softly will we care for
            Each enfranchised soul.
          Softly and unlothly
            Through the door of opal
            Toward the heavenly people,
          Floated on a minor fine
          Into the full chant divine,
            We will draw you smoothly,--
          While the human in the minor
          Makes the harmony diviner.
            Listen to our loving!

  _Second Semichorus._
          There, a sough of glory
            Shall breathe on you as you come,
          Ruffling round the doorway
            All the light of angeldom.
          From the empyrean centre
            Heavenly voices shall repeat,
          "Souls redeemed and pardoned, enter,
            For the chrism on you is sweet!"
          And every angel in the place
          Lowlily shall bow his face,
            Folded fair on softened sounds,
          Because upon your hands and feet
            He images his Master's wounds.
              Listen to our loving!

  _First Semichorus._
          So, in the universe's
            Consummated undoing,
          Our seraphs of white mercies
            Shall hover round the ruin.
          Their wings shall stream upon the flame
            As if incorporate of the same
            In elemental fusion;
          And calm their faces shall burn out
          With a pale and mastering thought,
          And a steadfast looking of desire
          From out between the clefts of fire,--
          While they cry, in the Holy's name,
            To the final Restitution.
               Listen to our loving!

  _Second Semichorus._
          So, when the day of God is
            To the thick graves accompted,
          Awaking the dead bodies,
            The angel of the trumpet
          Shall split and shatter the earth
            To the roots of the grave--
          Which never before were slackened--
          And quicken the charnel birth
          With his blast so clear and brave
            That the Dead shall start and stand erect,
          And every face of the burial-place
          Shall the awful, single look reflect
            Wherewith he them awakened.
              Listen to our loving!

  _First Semichorus._
          But wild is the horse of Death!
          He will leap up wild at the clamour
            Above and beneath.
            And where is his Tamer
            On that last day,
            When he crieth Ha, ha!
            To the trumpet's blare,
        And paweth the earth's Aceldama?
            When he tosseth his head,
            The drear-white steed,
        And ghastlily champeth the last moon-ray--
            What angel there
            Can lead him away,
          That the living may rule for the Dead?

  _Second Semichorus._
          Yet a TAMER shall be found!
          One more bright than seraph crowned,
          And more strong than cherub bold,
          Elder, too, than angel old,
          By his grey eternities.
          He shall master and surprise
            The steed of Death.
          For He is strong, and He is fain.
          He shall quell him with a breath,
          And shall lead him where He will,
          With a whisper in the ear,
            Full of fear,
          And a hand upon the mane,
            Grand and still.

  _First Semichorus._
  Through the flats of Hades where the souls assemble
  He will guide the Death-steed calm between their ranks,
  While, like beaten dogs, they a little moan and tremble
  To see the darkness curdle from the horse's glittering flanks.
  Through the flats of Hades where the dreary shade is,
  Up the steep of heaven will the Tamer guide the steed,--
  Up the spheric circles, circle above circle,
  We who count the ages shall count the tolling tread--
  Every hoof-fall striking a blinder blanker sparkle
  From the stony orbs, which shall show as they were dead.

  _Second Semichorus._
  All the way the Death-steed with tolling hoofs shall travel,
  Ashen-grey the planets shall be motionless as stones,
  Loosely shall the systems eject their parts coaeval,
  Stagnant in the spaces shall float the pallid moons:
  Suns that touch their apogees, reeling from their level,
  Shall run back on their axles, in wild low broken tunes.

  _Chorus._
  Up against the arches of the crystal ceiling,
  From the horse's nostrils shall steam the blurting breath:
  Up between the angels pale with silent feeling
  Will the Tamer calmly lead the horse of Death.

  _Semichorus._
  Cleaving all that silence, cleaving all that glory,
  Will the Tamer lead him straightway to the Throne:
  "Look out, O Jehovah, to this I bring before Thee,
  With a hand nail-pierced, I who am thy Son."
  Then the Eye Divinest, from the Deepest, flaming,
  On the mystic courser shall look out in fire:
  Blind the beast shall stagger where It overcame him,
  Meek as lamb at pasture, bloodless in desire.
  Down the beast shall shiver,--slain amid the taming,--
  And, by Life essential, the phantasm Death expire.

  _Chorus._
        Listen, man, through life and death,
        Through the dust and through the breath,
          Listen down the heart of things!
          Ye shall hear our mystic wings
            Murmurous with loving.

  _A Voice from below._ Gabriel, thou Gabriel!

  _A Voice from above._ What wouldst _thou_ with me?

  _First Voice._ I heard thy voice sound in the angels' song,
  And I would give thee question.

  _Second Voice._ Question me!

  _First Voice._ Why have I called thrice to my Morning Star
  And had no answer? All the stars are out,
  And answer in their places. Only in vain
  I cast my voice against the outer rays
  Of _my_ Star shut in light behind the sun.
  No more reply than from a breaking string,
  Breaking when touched. Or is she _not_ my star?
  Where _is_ my Star--my Star? Have ye cast down
  Her glory like my glory? Has she waxed
  Mortal, like Adam? Has she learnt to hate
  Like any angel?

  _Second Voice._ She is sad for thee.
  All things grow sadder to thee, one by one.

  _Angel Chorus._
          Live, work on, O Earthy!
            By the Actual's tension,
          Speed the arrow worthy
            Of a pure ascension!
          From the low earth round you,
            Reach the heights above you:
          From the stripes that wound you,
            Seek the loves that love you!
          God's divinest burneth plain
          Through the crystal diaphane
            Of our loves that love you.

  _First Voice._ Gabriel, O Gabriel!

  _Second Voice._ What wouldst _thou_ with me?

  _First Voice._ Is it true, O thou Gabriel, that the crown
  Of sorrow which I claimed, another claims?
  That HE claims THAT too?

  _Second Voice._           Lost one, it is true.

  _First Voice._ That HE will be an exile from his heaven,
  To lead those exiles homeward?

  _Second Voice._                  It is true.

  _First Voice._ That HE will be an exile by his will,
  As I by mine election?

  _Second Voice._        It is true.

  _First Voice._ That _I_ shall stand sole exile finally,--
  Made desolate for fruition?

  _Second Voice._                It is true.

  _First Voice._ Gabriel!

  _Second Voice._          I hearken.

  _First Voice._                     Is it true besides--
  Aright true--that mine orient Star will give
  Her name of "Bright and Morning-Star" to HIM,--
  And take the fairness of his virtue back
  To cover loss and sadness?

  _Second Voice._               It is true.

  _First Voice._ UNtrue, UNtrue! O Morning Star, O MINE,
  Who sittest secret in a veil of light
  Far up the starry spaces, say--_Untrue!_
  Speak but so loud as doth a wasted moon
  To Tyrrhene waters. I am Lucifer.

[_A pause. Silence in the stars._

  All things grow sadder to me, one by one.

  _Angel Chorus._
          Exiled human creatures,
            Let your hope grow larger!
          Larger grows the vision
            Of the new delight.
          From this chain of Nature's
            God is the Discharger,
          And the Actual's prison
            Opens to your sight.

  _Semichorus._
          Calm the stars and golden
            In a light exceeding:
          What their rays have measured
            Let your feet fulfil!
          These are stars beholden
            By your eyes in Eden,
          Yet, across the desert,
            See them shining still!

  _Chorus._
          Future joy and far light
            Working such relations,
          Hear us singing gently
            _Exiled is not lost!_
          God, above the starlight,
            God, above the patience,
          Shall at last present ye
            Guerdons worth the cost.
          Patiently enduring,
            Painfully surrounded,
          Listen how we love you,
            Hope the uttermost!
          Waiting for that curing
            Which exalts the wounded,
          Hear us sing above you--
            EXILED, BUT NOT LOST!

[_The stars shine on brightly while ADAM and EVE pursue their way into
the far wilderness. There is a sound through the silence, as of the
falling tears of an angel._

FOOTNOTES:

[B] Adam recognizes in _Aquarius_, the Water-bearer, and _Sagittarius_,
the Archer, distinct types of the man bearing and the man
combating,--the passive and active forms of human labour. I hope that
the preceding zodiacal signs--transferred to the earthly shadow and
representative purpose--of Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, Libra, Scorpio,
Capricornus, and Pisces, are sufficiently obvious to the reader.

[C] Her maternal instinct is excited by Gemini.




THE SERAPHIM


I look for Angels' songs, and hear Him cry.

                               GILES FLETCHER.




THE SERAPHIM.


PART THE FIRST.

[_It is the time of the Crucifixion; and the Angels of Heaven have
departed towards the Earth, except the two Seraphim, ADOR the Strong
and ZERAH the Bright One._
_The place is the outer side of the shut Heavenly Gate._]

  _Ador._ O Seraph, pause no more!
        Beside this gate of heaven we stand alone.

  _Zerah._ Of heaven!

  _Ador._        Our brother hosts are gone--

  _Zerah._ Are gone before.

  _Ador._ And the golden harps the angels bore
        To help the songs of their desire,
        Still burning from their hands of fire,
        Lie without touch or tone
          Upon the glass-sea shore.

  _Zerah._ Silent upon the glass-sea shore!

  _Ador._ There the Shadow from the throne
          Formless with infinity
          Hovers o'er the crystal sea
            Awfuller than light derived,
          And red with those primeval heats
           Whereby all life has lived.

  _Zerah._ Our visible God, our heavenly seats!

  _Ador._ Beneath us sinks the pomp angelical,
          Cherub and seraph, powers and virtues, all,--
            The roar of whose descent has died
          To a still sound, as thunder into rain.
            Immeasurable space spreads magnified
          With that thick life, along the plane
          The worlds slid out on. What a fall
          And eddy of wings innumerous, crossed
          By trailing curls that have not lost
          The glitter of the God-smile shed
          On every prostrate angel's head!
          What gleaming up of hands that fling
            Their homage in retorted rays,
          From high instinct of worshipping,
            And habitude of praise!

  _Zerah._ Rapidly they drop below us:
            Pointed palm and wing and hair
          Indistinguishable show us
            Only pulses in the air
          Throbbing with a fiery beat,
          As if a new creation heard
          Some divine and plastic word,
        And trembling at its new-found being,
          Awakened at our feet.

  _Ador._ Zerah, do not wait for seeing!
        HIS voice, his, that thrills us so
        As we our harpstrings, uttered _Go_,
        _Behold the Holy in his woe!_
        And all are gone, save thee and--

  _Zerah._                                  Thee!

  _Ador._ I stood the nearest to the throne
        In hierarchical degree,
        What time the Voice said _Go_!
        And whether I was moved alone
        By the storm-pathos of the tone
      Which swept through heaven the alien name of _woe_,
        Or whether the subtle glory broke
        Through my strong and shielding wings,
        Bearing to my finite essence
        Incapacious of their presence,
            Infinite imaginings,
      None knoweth save the Throned who spoke;
      But I who at creation stood upright
        And heard the God-breath move
  Shaping the words that lightened, "Be there light,
        Nor trembled but with love,
        Now fell down shudderingly,
  My face upon the pavement whence I had towered,
  As if in mine immortal overpowered
        By God's eternity.

  _Zerah._ Let me wait!--let me wait!--

  _Ador._ Nay, gaze not backward through the gate!
  God fills our heaven with God's own solitude
      Till all the pavements glow:
  His Godhead being no more subdued,
      By itself, to glories low
        Which seraphs can sustain.
      What if thou, in gazing so,
      Shouldst behold but only one
      Attribute, the veil undone--
    Even that to which we dare to press
    Nearest, for its gentleness--
      Ay, his love!
    How the deep ecstatic pain
    Thy being's strength would capture!
    Without language for the rapture,
    Without music strong to come
      And set the adoration free,
      For ever, ever, wouldst thou be
    Amid the general chorus dumb,
    God-stricken to seraphic agony.
      Or, brother, what if on thine eyes
      In vision bare should rise
  The life-fount whence his hand did gather
      With solitary force
      Our immortalities!
  Straightway how thine own would wither,
      Falter like a human breath,
      And shrink into a point like death,
        By gazing on its source!--
      My words have imaged dread
      Meekly hast thou bent thine head,
      And dropt thy wings in languishment:
      Overclouding foot and face,
      As if God's throne were eminent
        Before thee, in the place.
        Yet not--not so,
  O loving spirit and meek, dost thou fulfil
  The supreme Will.
  Not for obeisance but obedience,
  Give motion to thy wings! Depart from hence!
          The voice said "Go!"

  _Zerah._ Beloved, I depart,
  His will is as a spirit within my spirit,
  A portion of the being I inherit.
  His will is mine obedience. I resemble
  A flame all undefiled though it tremble;
  I go and tremble. Love me, O beloved!
      O thou, who stronger art,
  And standest ever near the Infinite,
      Pale with the light of Light,
  Love me, beloved! me, more newly made,
        More feeble, more afraid;
  And let me hear with mine thy pinions moved,
  As close and gentle as the loving are,
  That love being near, heaven may not seem so far.

  _Ador._ I am near thee and I love thee.
        Were I loveless, from thee gone,
        Love is round, beneath, above thee,
        God, the omnipresent one.
        Spread the wing and lift the brow!
        Well-beloved, what fearest thou?

  _Zerah._ I fear, I fear--

  _Ador._                What fear?

  _Zerah._                        The fear of earth.

  _Ador._ Of earth, the God-created and God-praised
  In the hour of birth?
  Where every night the moon in light
  Doth lead the waters silver-faced?
    Where every day the sun doth lay
  A rapture to the heart of all
  The leafy and reeded pastoral,
      As if the joyous shout which burst
      From angel lips to see him first,
        Had left a silent echo in his ray?

  _Zerah._ Of earth--the God-created and God-curst,
      Where man is, and the thorn:
      Where sun and moon have borne
      No light to souls forlorn:
  Where Eden's tree of life no more uprears
    Its spiral leaves and fruitage, but instead
    The yew-tree bows its melancholy head
  And all the undergrasses kills and seres.

  _Ador._ Of earth the weak,
  Made and unmade?
  Where men, that faint, do strive for crowns that fade?
  Where, having won the profit which they seek,
  They lie beside the sceptre and the gold
  With fleshless hands that cannot wield or hold,
  And the stars shine in their unwinking eyes?

  _Zerah._ Of earth the bold,
  Where the blind matter wrings
  An awful potence out of impotence,
  Bowing the spiritual things
      To the things of sense.
  Where the human will replies
  With ay and no,
  Because the human pulse is quick or slow.
        Where Love succumbs to Change,
        With only his own memories, for revenge.
        And the fearful mystery--

  _Ador._                      called Death?

  _Zerah._ Nay, death is fearful,--but who saith
        "To die," is comprehensible.
        What's fearfuller, thou knowest well,
        Though the utterance be not for thee,
        Lest it blanch thy lips from glory--
        Ay! the cursed thing that moved
        A shadow of ill, long time ago,
        Across our heaven's own shining floor,
        And when it vanished, some who were
        On thrones of holy empire there,
        Did reign--were seen--were--never more.
          Come nearer, O beloved!

  _Ador._ I am near thee. Didst thou bear thee
        Ever to this earth?

  _Zerah._                Before.
        When thrilling from His hand along
        Its lustrous path with spheric song
        The earth was deathless, sorrowless.
        Unfearing, then, pure feet might press
        The grasses brightening with their feet,
        For God's own voice did mix its sound
        In a solemn confluence oft
        With the rivers' flowing round,
        And the life-tree's waving soft.
        Beautiful new earth and strange!

  _Ador._ Hast thou seen it since--the change?

  _Zerah._ Nay, or wherefore should I fear
          To look upon it now?
        I have beheld the ruined things
        Only in depicturings
        Of angels from an earthly mission,--
        Strong one, even upon thy brow,
        When, with task completed, given
        Back to us in that transition,
        I have beheld thee silent stand,
        Abstracted in the seraph band,
            Without a smile in heaven.

  _Ador._ Then thou wast not one of those
        Whom the loving Father chose
        In visionary pomp to sweep
        O'er Judaea's grassy places,
        O'er the shepherds and the sheep,
        Though thou art so tender?--dimming
        All the stars except one star
        With their brighter kinder faces,
        And using heaven's own tune in hymning,
  While deep response from earth's own mountains ran,
        "Peace upon earth, goodwill to man."

  _Zerah._ "Glory to God." I said amen afar.
  And those who from that earthly mission are,
      Within mine ears have told
  That the seven everlasting Spirits did hold
  With such a sweet and prodigal constraint
  The meaning yet the mystery of the song
  What time they sang it, on their natures strong,
  That, gazing down on earth's dark steadfastness
  And speaking the new peace in promises,
  The love and pity made their voices faint
  Into the low and tender music, keeping
  The place in heaven of what on earth is weeping.

  _Ador._ "Peace upon earth." Come down to it.

  _Zerah._                              Ah me!
  I hear thereof uncomprehendingly.
  Peace where the tempest, where the sighing is,
  And worship of the idol, 'stead of His?

  _Ador._ Yea, peace, where He is.

  _Zerah._                        He!
  Say it again.

  _Ador._       Where He is.

  _Zerah._                   Can it be
  That earth retains a tree
  Whose leaves, like Eden foliage, can be swayed
  By the breathing of His voice, nor shrink and fade?

  _Ador._ There is a tree!--it hath no leaf nor root;
      Upon it hangs a curse for all its fruit:
        Its shadow on his head is laid.
        For he, the crowned Son,
        Has left his crown and throne,
        Walks earth in Adam's clay,
        Eve's snake to bruise and slay--

  _Zerah._ Walks earth in clay?

  _Ador._ And walking in the clay which he created,
      He through it shall touch death.
  What do I utter? what conceive? did breath
  Of demon howl it in a blasphemy?
  Or was it mine own voice, informed, dilated
  By the seven confluent Spirits?--Speak--answer me!

  _Who_ said man's victim was his deity?

  _Zerah._ Beloved, beloved, the word came forth from thee.
  Thine eyes are rolling a tempestuous light
      Above, below, around,
  As putting thunder-questions without cloud,
      Reverberate without sound,
  To universal nature's depth and height.
  The tremor of an inexpressive thought
  Too self-amazed to shape itself aloud,
  O'erruns the awful curving of thy lips;
    And while thine hands are stretched above,
      As newly they had caught
  Some lightning from the Throne, or showed the Lord
      Some retributive sword,
  Thy brows do alternate with wild eclipse
  And radiance, with contrasted wrath and love,
    As God had called thee to a seraph's part,
      With a man's quailing heart.

  _Ador._ O heart--O heart of man!
          O ta'en from human clay
    To be no seraph's but Jehovah's own!
          Made holy in the taking,
          And yet unseparate
        From death's perpetual ban,
  And human feelings sad and passionate:
  Still subject to the treacherous forsaking
  Of other hearts, and its own steadfast pain.
  O heart of man--of God! which God has ta'en
  From out the dust, with its humanity
  Mournful and weak yet innocent around it,
  And bade its many pulses beating lie
  Beside that incommunicable stir
  Of Deity wherewith he interwound it.
  O man! and is thy nature so defiled
  That all that holy Heart's devout law-keeping,
  And low pathetic beat in deserts wild,
  And gushings pitiful of tender weeping
  For traitors who consigned it to such woe--
  That all could cleanse thee not, without the flow
  Of blood, the life-blood--_His_--and streaming _so_?
  O earth the thundercleft, windshaken, where
  The louder voice of "blood and blood" doth rise,
  Hast thou an altar for this sacrifice?
        O heaven! O vacant throne!
  O crowned hierarchies that wear your crown
        When His is put away!
  Are ye unshamed that ye cannot dim
  Your alien brightness to be liker him,
  Assume a human passion, and down-lay
  Your sweet secureness for congenial fears,
  And teach your cloudless ever-burning eyes
        The mystery of his tears?

  _Zerah._ I am strong, I am strong.
  Were I never to see my heaven again,
  I would wheel to earth like the tempest rain
  Which sweeps there with an exultant sound
  To lose its life as it reaches the ground.
  I am strong, I am strong.
  Away from mine inward vision swim
  The shining seats of my heavenly birth,
  I see but his, I see but him--
  The Maker's steps on his cruel earth.
  Will the bitter herbs of earth grow sweet
  To me, as trodden by his feet?
        Will the vexed, accurst humanity,
        As worn by him, begin to be
        A blessed, yea, a sacred thing
        For love and awe and ministering?
            I am strong, I am strong.
        By our angel ken shall we survey
        His loving smile through his woeful clay?
            I am swift, I am strong,
        The love is bearing me along.

  _Ador._ One love is bearing us along.


PART THE SECOND.

_Mid-air, above Judaea. ADOR and ZERAH are a little apart from the
visible Angelic Hosts._

  _Ador._ Beloved! dost thou see?--

  _Zerah._    Thee,--thee.
        Thy burning eyes already are
        Grown wild and mournful as a star
        Whose occupation is for aye
        To look upon the place of clay
          Whereon thou lookest now.
        The crown is fainting on thy brow
        To the likeness of a cloud,
        The forehead's self a little bowed
        From its aspect high and holy,
        As it would in meekness meet
        Some seraphic melancholy:
        Thy very wings that lately flung
        An outline clear, do flicker here
        And wear to each a shadow hung,
          Dropped across thy feet.
        In these strange contrasting glooms
        Stagnant with the scent of tombs,
        Seraph faces, O my brother,
        Show awfully to one another.

  _Ador._ Dost thou see?

  _Zerah._               Even so; I see
        Our empyreal company,
      Alone the memory of their brightness
        Left in them, as in thee.
  The circle upon circle, tier on tier,
      Piling earth's hemisphere
      With heavenly infiniteness,
        Above us and around,
  Straining the whole horizon like a bow:
  Their songful lips divorced from all sound,
  A darkness gliding down their silvery glances,--
  Bowing their steadfast solemn countenances
  As if they heard God speak, and could not glow.

  _Ador._ Look downward! dost thou see?

  _Zerah._ And wouldst thou press _that_ vision on my words?
  Doth not earth speak enough
  Of change and of undoing,
  Without a seraph's witness? Oceans rough
  With tempest, pastoral swards
  Displaced by fiery deserts, mountains ruing
  The bolt fallen yesterday,
  That shake their piny heads, as who would say
  "We are too beautiful for our decay"--
  Shall seraphs speak of these things? Let alone
      Earth to her earthly moan!

  _Voice of all things._ Is there no moan but hers?

  _Ador._ Hearest thou the attestation
      Of the roused universe
      Like a desert-lion shaking
      Dews of silence from its mane?
      With an irrepressive passion
          Uprising at once,
      Rising up and forsaking
      Its solemn state in the circle of suns,
          To attest the pain
      Of him who stands (O patience sweet!)
      In his own hand-prints of creation,
          With human feet?

  _Voice of all things._ Is there no moan but ours?

  _Zerah._ Forms, Spaces, Motions wide,
      O meek, insensate things,
    O congregated matters! who inherit,
      Instead of vital powers,
      Impulsions God-supplied;
      Instead of influent spirit,
      A clear informing beauty;
      Instead of creature-duty,
      Submission calm as rest.
      Lights, without feet or wings,
      In golden courses sliding!
      Glooms, stagnantly subsiding,
    Whose lustrous heart away was prest
        Into the argent stars!
      Ye crystal firmamental bars
      That hold the skyey waters free
      From tide or tempest's ecstasy!
      Airs universal! thunders lorn
      That wait your lightnings in cloud-cave
      Hewn out by the winds! O brave
      And subtle elements! the Holy
      Hath charged me by your voice with folly.[D]
    Enough, the mystic arrow leaves its wound.
    Return ye to your silences inborn,
    Or to your inarticulated sound!

  _Ador._ Zerah!

  _Zerah._ Wilt _thou_ rebuke?
    God hath rebuked me, brother. I am weak.

  _Ador._ Zerah, my brother Zerah! could I speak
    Of thee, 'twould be of love to thee.

  _Zerah._                                Thy look
    Is fixed on earth, as mine upon thy face.
    Where shall I seek His?
                            I have thrown
      One look upon earth, but one,
      Over the blue mountain-lines,
      Over the forests of palms and pines,
      Over the harvest-lands golden,
      Over the valleys that fold in
      The gardens and vines--
        He is not there.
      All these are unworthy
      Those footsteps to bear,
        Before which, bowing down
  I would fain quench the stars of my crown
        In the dark of the earthy.
      Where shall I seek him?
                                No reply?
      Hath language left thy lips, to place
      Its vocal in thine eye?
        Ador, Ador! are we come
      To a double portent, that
      Dumb matter grows articulate
        And songful seraphs dumb?
      Ador, Ador!

  _Ador._    I constrain
      The passion of my silence. None
      Of those places gazed upon
        Are gloomy enow to fit his pain.
        Unto Him, whose forming word
        Gave to Nature flower and sward.
          She hath given back again,
            For the myrtle--the thorn,
  For the sylvan calm--the human scorn.
  Still, still, reluctant seraph, gaze beneath!
  There is a city----

  _Zerah._            Temple and tower,
  Palace and purple would droop like a flower,
        (Or a cloud at our breath)
        If He neared in his state
        The outermost gate.

  _Ador._                        Ah me, not so
  In the state of a king did the victim go!
  And THOU who hangest mute of speech
      'Twixt heaven and earth, with forehead yet
      Stained by the bloody sweat,
  God! man! Thou hast forgone thy throne in each.

  _Zerah._ Thine eyes behold him?

  _Ador._                           Yea, below.
      Track the gazing of mine eyes,
      Naming God within thine heart
      That its weakness may depart
        And the vision rise!
      Seest thou yet, beloved?

  _Zerah._                     I see
  Beyond the city, crosses three
  And mortals three that hang thereon
  'Ghast and silent to the sun.
  Round them blacken and welter and press
  Staring multitudes whose father
  Adam was, whose brows are dark
  With his Cain's corroded mark,--
  Who curse with looks. Nay--let me rather
  Turn unto the wilderness!

  _Ador._ Turn not! God dwells with men.

  _Zerah._                                Above
  He dwells with angels, and they love.
  Can these love? With the living's pride
  They stare at those who die, who hang
  In their sight and die. They bear the streak
  Of the crosses' shadow, black not wide,
  To fall on their heads, as it swerves aside
            When the victims' pang
            Makes the dry wood creak.

  _Ador._ The cross--the cross!

  _Zerah._                       A woman kneels
            The mid cross under,
            With white lips asunder,
            And motion on each.
            They throb, as she feels,
            With a spasm, not a speech;
            And her lids, close as sleep,
            Are less calm, for the eyes
            Have made room there to weep
            Drop on drop--

  _Ador._                    Weep? Weep blood,
            All women, all men!
            He sweated it, He,
            For your pale womanhood
            And base manhood. Agree
            That these water-tears, then,
            Are vain, mocking like laughter:
            Weep blood! Shall the flood
  Of salt curses, whose foam is the darkness, on roll
  Forward, on from the strand of the storm-beaten years,
  And back from the rocks of the horrid hereafter,
  And up, in a coil, from the present's wrath-spring,
  Yea, down from the windows of heaven opening,
  Deep calling to deep as they meet on His soul--
            And men weep only tears?

  _Zerah._ Little drops in the lapse!
            And yet, Ador, perhaps
            It is all that they can.
            Tears! the lovingest man
            Has no better bestowed
            Upon man.

  _Ador._                 Nor on God.

  _Zerah._                   Do all-givers need gifts?
  If the Giver said "Give," the first motion would slay
  Our Immortals, the echo would ruin away
  The same worlds which he made. Why, what angel uplifts
          Such a music, so clear,
          It may seem in God's ear
  Worth more than a woman's hoarse weeping? And thus,
  Pity tender as tears, I above thee would speak,
  Thou woman that weepest! weep unscorned of us!
  I, the tearless and pure, am but loving and weak.

  _Ador._ Speak low, my brother, low,--and not of love
  Or human or angelic! Rather stand
  Before the throne of that Supreme above,
  In whose infinitude the secrecies
  Of thine own being lie hid, and lift thine hand
  Exultant, saying, "Lord God, I am wise!"--
  Than utter _here_, "I love."

  _Zerah._                 And yet thine eyes
  Do utter it. They melt in tender light,
  The tears of heaven.

  _Ador._              Of heaven. Ah me!

  _Zerah._ Ador!

  _Ador._        Say on!

  _Zerah._               The crucified are three.
  Beloved, they are unlike.

  _Ador._                  Unlike.

  _Zerah._                          For one
        Is as a man who has sinned and still
        Doth wear the wicked will,
      The hard malign life-energy,
  Tossed outward, in the parting soul's disdain,
  On brow and lip that cannot change again.

  _Ador._ And one--

  _Zerah._             Has also sinned.
  And yet (O marvel!) doth the Spirit-wind
  Blow white those waters? Death upon his face
    Is rather shine than shade,
  A tender shine by looks beloved made:
  He seemeth dying in a quiet place,
  And less by iron wounds in hands and feet
  Than heart-broke by new joy too sudden and sweet.

  _Ador._ And ONE!--

  _Zerah._          And ONE!--

  _Ador._                    Why dost thou pause?

  _Zerah._                          God! God!
    Spirit of my spirit! who movest
  Through seraph veins in burning deity
  To light the quenchless pulses!--

  _Ador._                            But hast trod
  The depths of love in thy peculiar nature,
  And not in any thou hast made and lovest
  In narrow seraph hearts!--

  _Zerah._                     Above, Creator!
  Within, Upholder!

  _Ador._              And below, below,
  The creature's and the upholden's sacrifice!

  _Zerah._ Why do I pause?--

  _Ador._                      There is a silentness
          That answers thee enow,
          That, like a brazen sound
  Excluding others, doth ensheathe us round,--
  Hear it. It is not from the visible skies
          Though they are still,
  Unconscious that their own dropped dews express
  The light of heaven on every earthly hill.
  It is not from the hills, though calm and bare
          They, since their first creation,
  Through midnight cloud or morning's glittering air
  Or the deep deluge blindness, toward the place
  Whence thrilled the mystic word's creative grace,
          And whence again shall come
          The word that uncreates,
  Have lift their brows in voiceless expectation.
  It is not from the places that entomb
  Man's dead, though common Silence there dilates
  Her soul to grand proportions, worthily
          To fill life's vacant room.
        Not there: not there.
  Not yet within those chambers lieth He,
  A dead one in his living world; his south
  And west winds blowing over earth and sea,
  And not a breath on that creating mouth.
        But now,--a silence keeps
        (Not death's, nor sleep's)
        The lips whose whispered word
  Might roll the thunders round reverberated.
        Silent art thou, O my Lord,
        Bowing down thy stricken head!
        Fearest thou, a groan of thine
  Would make the pulse of thy creation fail
  As thine own pulse?--would rend the veil
  Of visible things and let the flood
  Of the unseen Light, the essential God,
  Rush in to whelm the undivine?
  Thy silence, to my thinking, is as dread.

  _Zerah._ O silence!

  _Ador._            Doth it say to thee--the NAME,
  Slow-learning seraph?

  _Zerah._              I have learnt.

  _Ador._                               The flame
  Perishes in thine eyes.

  _Zerah._              He opened his,
  And looked. I cannot bear--

  _Ador._                       Their agony?

  _Zerah._ Their love. God's depth is in them. From his brows
  White, terrible in meekness, didst thou see
          The lifted eyes unclose?
  He is God, seraph! Look no more on me,
  O God--I am not God.

  _Ador._                 The loving is
  Sublimed within them by the sorrowful.
  In heaven we could sustain them.

  _Zerah._                         Heaven is dull,
  Mine Ador, to man's earth. The light that burns
          In fluent, refluent motion
          Along the crystal ocean;
  The springing of the golden harps between
  The bowery wings, in fountains of sweet sound,
  The winding, wandering music that returns
  Upon itself, exultingly self-bound
  In the great spheric round
          Of everlasting praises;
  The God-thoughts in our midst that intervene,
  Visibly flashing from the supreme throne
          Full in seraphic faces
  Till each astonishes the other, grown
  More beautiful with worship and delight--
  My heaven! my home of heaven! my infinite
  Heaven-choirs! what are ye to this dust and death,
  This cloud, this cold, these tears, this failing breath,
  Where God's immortal love now issueth
          In this MAN'S woe?

  _Ador._ His eyes are very deep yet calm.

  _Zerah._                                 No more
  On _me_, Jehovah-man--

  _Ador._                  Calm-deep. They show
  A passion which is tranquil. They are seeing
  No earth, no heaven, no men that slay and curse,
          No seraphs that adore;
  Their gaze is on the invisible, the dread,
  The things we cannot view or think or speak,
  Because we are too happy, or too weak,--
  The sea of ill, for which the universe,
  With all its piled space, can find no shore,
  With all its life, no living foot to tread.
  But he, accomplished in Jehovah-being,
          Sustains the gaze adown,
          Conceives the vast despair,
  And feels the billowy griefs come up to drown,
  Nor fears, nor faints, nor fails, till all be finished.

  _Zerah._ Thus, do I find Thee thus? My undiminished
  And undiminishable God!--my God!
  The echoes are still tremulous along
  The heavenly mountains, of the latest song
  Thy manifested glory swept abroad
  In rushing past our lips: they echo aye
          "Creator, thou art strong!
  Creator, thou art blessed over all."
  By what new utterance shall I now recall,
  Unteaching the heaven-echoes? Dare I say,
  "Creator, thou art feebler than thy work!
  Creator, thou art sadder than thy creature!
          A worm, and not a man,
          Yea, no worm, but a curse?"
  I dare not so mine heavenly phrase reverse.
  Albeit the piercing thorn and thistle-fork
          (Whose seed disordered ran
  From Eve's hand trembling when the curse did reach her)
  Be garnered darklier in thy soul, the rod
  That smites thee never blossoming, and thou
  Grief-bearer for thy world, with unkinged brow--
  I leave to men their song of Ichabod:
  I have an angel-tongue--I know but praise.

  _Ador._ Hereafter shall the blood-bought captives raise
  The passion-song of blood.

  _Zerah._                    And _we_, extend
  Our holy vacant hands towards the Throne,
  Crying "We have no music."

  _Ador._                      Rather, blend
          Both musics into one.
  The sanctities and sanctified above
  Shall each to each, with lifted looks serene,
          Their shining faces lean,
          And mix the adoring breath
  And breathe the full thanksgiving.

  _Zerah._                           But the love--
  The love, mine Ador!

  _Ador._                 Do we love not?

  _Zerah._                                   Yea,
  But not as man shall! not with life for death,
  New-throbbing through the startled being; not
  With strange astonished smiles, that ever may
  Gush passionate like tears and fill their place:
  Nor yet with speechless memories of what
  Earth's winters were, enverduring the green
         Of every heavenly palm
         Whose windless, shadeless calm
  Moves only at the breath of the Unseen.
  Oh, not with this blood on us--and this face,--
  Still, haply, pale with sorrow that it bore
  In our behalf, and tender evermore
  With nature all our own, upon us gazing--
  Nor yet with these forgiving hands upraising
  Their unreproachful wounds, alone to bless!
  Alas, Creator! shall we love thee less
  Than mortals shall?

  _Ador._                 Amen! so let it be.
  We love in our proportion, to the bound
  Thine infinite our finite set around,
  And that is finitely,--thou, infinite
  And worthy infinite love! And our delight
  Is, watching the dear love poured out to thee
  From ever fuller chalice. Blessed they,
  Who love thee more than we do: blessed we,
  Viewing that love which shall exceed even this,
  And winning in the sight a double bliss
  For all so lost in love's supremacy.
  The bliss is better. Only on the sad
      Cold earth there are who say
  It seemeth better to be great than glad.
  The bliss is better. Love him more, O man,
          Than sinless seraphs can!

  _Zerah._ Yea, love him more!

  _Voices of the Angelic Multitude._ Yea, more!

  _Ador._                             The loving word
  Is caught by those from whom we stand apart.
  For silence hath no deepness in her heart
  Where love's low name low breathed would not be heard
  By angels, clear as thunder.

  _Angelic Voices._            Love him more!

  _Ador._ Sweet voices, swooning o'er
          The music which ye make!
    Albeit to love there were not ever given
    A mournful sound when uttered out of heaven,
    That angel-sadness ye would fitly take.
    Of love be silent now! we gaze adown
    Upon the incarnate Love who wears no crown.
  _Zerah._ No crown! the woe instead
            Is heavy on his head,
            Pressing inward on his brain
            With a hot and clinging pain
            Till all tears are prest away,
          And clear and calm his vision may
            Peruse the black abyss.
            No rod, no sceptre is
          Holden in his fingers pale;
          They close instead upon the nail,
            Concealing the sharp dole,
          Never stirring to put by
            The fair hair peaked with blood,
          Drooping forward from the rood
            Helplessly, heavily
          On the cheek that waxeth colder,
          Whiter ever, and the shoulder
            Where the government was laid.
            His glory made the heavens afraid;
          Will he not unearth this cross from its hole?
          His pity makes his piteous state;
        Will he be uncompassionate
          Alone to his proper soul?
          Yea, will he not lift up
          His lips from the bitter cup,
          His brows from the dreary weight,
          His hand from the clenching cross,
        Crying, "My Father, give to me
        Again the joy I had with thee
        Or ere this earth was made for loss?
            No stir no sound.
        The love and woe being interwound
            He cleaveth to the woe;
        And putteth forth heaven's strength below,
                  To bear.

  _Ador._ And that creates his anguish now,
        Which made his glory there.

  _Zerah._ Shall it need be so?
          Awake, thou Earth! behold.
          Thou, uttered forth of old
          In all thy life-emotion,
          In all thy vernal noises,
          In the rollings of thine ocean,
          Leaping founts, and rivers running,--
          In thy woods' prophetic heaving
          Ere the rains a stroke have given,
          In thy winds' exultant voices
        When they feel the hills anear,--
          In the firmamental sunning,
          And the tempest which rejoices
        Thy full heart with an awful cheer.
          Thou, uttered forth of old
          And with all thy music rolled
            In a breath abroad
            By the breathing God,--
        Awake! He is here! behold!
        Even _thou_--
                      beseems it good
        To thy vacant vision dim,
        That the deadly ruin should,
        For thy sake, encompass him?
        That the Master-word should lie
        A mere silence, while his own
            Processive harmony,
        The faintest echo of his lightest tone,
        Is sweeping in a choral triumph by?
          Awake! emit a cry!
          And say, albeit used
          From Adam's ancient years
          To falls of acrid tears,
          To frequent sighs unloosed,
          Caught back to press again
          On bosoms zoned with pain--
        To corses still and sullen
        The shine and music dulling
        With closed eyes and ears
        That nothing sweet can enter,
        Commoving thee no less
        With that forced quietness
        Than the earthquake in thy centre--
        Thou hast not learnt to bear
        This new divine despair!
        These tears that sink into thee,
        These dying eyes that view thee,
        This dropping blood from lifted rood,
        They darken and undo thee.
  Thou canst not presently sustain this corse--
        Cry, cry, thou hast not force!
        Cry, thou wouldst fainer keep
        Thy hopeless charnels deep,
        Thyself a general tomb
        Where the first and the second Death
        Sit gazing face to face
        And mar each other's breath,
  While silent bones through all the place
  'Neath sun and moon do faintly glisten
        And seem to lie and listen
  For the tramp of the coming Doom.
            Is it not meet
      That they who erst the Eden fruit did eat,
        Should champ the ashes?
      That they who wrap them in the thunder-cloud
        Should wear it as a shroud,
        Perishing by its flashes?
      That they who vexed the lion should be rent?
      Cry, cry "I will sustain my punishment,
      The sin being mine; but take away from me
      This visioned Dread--this man--this Deity!"

  _The Earth._ I have groaned; I have travailed: I am weary.
  I am blind with my own grief, and cannot see,
  As clear-eyed angels can, his agony,
  And what I see I also can sustain,
  Because his power protects me from his pain.
  I have groaned; I have travailed: I am dreary,
  Hearkening the thick sobs of my children's heart:
          How can I say "Depart"
  To that Atoner making calm and free?
          Am I a God as he,
  To lay down peace and power as willingly?

  _Ador._ He looked for some to pity. There is none.
  All pity is within him and not for him.
  His earth is iron under him, and o'er him
            His skies are brass.
            His seraphs cry "Alas!"
  With hallelujah voice that cannot weep.
  And man, for whom the dreadful work is done ...

  _Scornful Voices from the Earth_. If verily this _be_ the Eternal's son--

  _Ador._ Thou hearest. Man is grateful.

  _Zerah._                                 Can I hear
  Nor darken into man and cease for ever
          My seraph-smile to wear?
              Was it for such,
            It pleased him to overleap
          His glory with his love and sever
          From the God-light and the throne
          And all angels bowing down,
          For whom his every look did touch
          New notes of joy on the unworn string
          Of an eternal worshipping?
            For such, he left his heaven?
            There, though never bought by blood
          And tears, we gave him gratitude:
          We loved him there, though unforgiven.

  _Ador._      The light is riven
                Above, around,
          And down in lurid fragments flung,
          That catch the mountain-peak and stream
              With momentary gleam,
          Then perish in the water and the ground.
          River and waterfall,
          Forest and wilderness,
        Mountain and city, are together wrung
        Into one shape, and that is shapelessness;
          The darkness stands for all.

  _Zerah._ The pathos hath the day undone:
          The death-look of His eyes
          Hath overcome the sun
        And made it sicken in its narrow skies.

  _Ador._ Is it to death? He dieth.

  _Zerah._                            Through the dark
  He still, he only, is discernible--
  The naked hands and feet transfixed stark,
  The countenance of patient anguish white,
      Do make themselves a light
  More dreadful than the glooms which round them dwell,
  And therein do they shine.

  _Ador._                     God! Father-God!
  Perpetual Radiance on the radiant throne!
  Uplift the lids of inward deity,
        Flashing abroad
      Thy burning Infinite!
  Light up this dark where there is nought to see
  Except the unimagined agony
  Upon the sinless forehead of the Son!

  _Zerah._ God, tarry not! Behold, enow
  Hath he wandered as a stranger,
  Sorrowed as a victim. Thou
        Appear for him, O Father!
        Appear for him, Avenger!
  Appear for him, just One and holy One,
        For he is holy and just!
  At once the darkness and dishonour rather
  To the ragged jaws of hungry chaos rake,
      And hurl aback to ancient dust
    These mortals that make blasphemies
    With their made breath, this earth and skies
        That only grow a little dim,
        Seeing their curse on him.
        But him, of all forsaken,
        Of creature and of brother,
        Never wilt thou forsake!
  Thy living and thy loving cannot slacken
  Their firm essential hold upon each other,
  And well thou dost remember how his part
  Was still to lie upon thy breast and be
  Partaker of the light that dwelt in thee
        Ere sun or seraph shone;
  And how while silence trembled round the throne
  Thou countedst by the beatings of his heart
  The moments of thine own eternity.
              Awaken,
  O right hand with the lightnings! Again gather
  His glory to thy glory! What estranger,
  What ill supreme in evil, can be thrust
  Between the faithful Father and the Son?
        Appear for him, O Father!
        Appear for him, Avenger!
  Appear for him, just One and holy One,
        For he is holy and just!

  _Ador._ Thy face upturned toward the throne is dark;
  Thou hast no answer, Zerah.

  _Zerah._                    No reply,
  O unforsaking Father?

  _Ador._                 Hark!
  Instead of downward voice, a cry
      Is uttered from beneath.

  _Zerah._ And by a sharper sound than death,
      Mine immortality is riven.
  The heavy darkness which doth tent the sky
  Floats backward as by a sudden wind:
      But I see no light behind,
    But I feel the farthest stars are all
      Stricken and shaken,
  And I know a shadow sad and broad
      Doth fall--doth fall
  On our vacant thrones in heaven.

  _Voice from the Cross._ MY GOD, MY GOD,
  WHY HAST THOU ME FORSAKEN?

  _The Earth._ Ah me, ah me, ah me! the dreadful Why!
  My sin is on thee, sinless one! Thou art
  God-orphaned, for my burden on thy head.
  Dark sin, white innocence, endurance dread!
  Be still, within your shrouds, my buried dead;
  Nor work with this quick horror round mine heart.

  _Zerah._ _He_ hath forsaken _him_. I perish.

  _Ador._                                Hold
  Upon his name! we perish not. Of old
  His will--

  _Zerah._ I seek his will. Seek, seraphim!
  My God, my God! where is it? Doth that curse
  Reverberate spare us, seraph or universe?
      _He_ hath forsaken _him_.

  _Ador._ He cannot fail.

  _Angel Voices._ We faint, we droop,
      Our love doth tremble like fear.

  _Voices of Fallen Angels from the Earth._ Do we prevail?
  Or are we lost? Hath not the ill we did
      Been heretofore our good?
  Is it not ill that one, all sinless, should
  Hang heavy with all curses on a cross?
  Nathless, that cry! With huddled faces hid
  Within the empty graves which men did scoop
  To hold more damned dead, we shudder through
      What shall exalt us or undo,
        Our triumph, or our loss.

  _Voice from the Cross._ IT IS FINISHED.

  _Zerah._                                 Hark, again!
          Like a victor, speaks the slain.

  _Angel Voices._ Finished be the trembling vain!

  _Ador._ Upward, like a well-loved son,
          Looketh he, the orphaned one.

  _Angel Voices._ Finished is the mystic pain.

  _Voices of Fallen Angels._ His deathly forehead at the word,
          Gleameth like a seraph sword.

  _Angel Voices._ Finished is the demon reign.

  _Ador._ His breath, as living God, createth,
          His breath, as dying man, completeth.

  _Angel Voices._ Finished work his hands sustain.

  _The Earth._ In mine ancient sepulchres
          Where my kings and prophets freeze,
          Adam dead four thousand years,
          Unwakened by the universe's
          Everlasting moan,
          Aye his ghastly silence mocking--
          Unwakened by his children's knocking
          At his old sepulchral stone,
            "Adam, Adam, all this curse is
            Thine and on us yet!"--
          Unwakened by the ceaseless tears
          Wherewith they made his cerement wet,
        "Adam, must thy curse remain?"--
      Starts with sudden life and hears
  Through the slow dripping of the caverned caves,--

  _Angel Voices._ Finished is his bane.

  _Voice from the Cross._ FATHER! MY SPIRIT TO THINE HANDS IS GIVEN.

  _Ador._ Hear the wailing winds that be
      By wings of unclean spirits made!
        They, in that last look, surveyed
      The love they lost in losing heaven,
          And passionately flee
      With a desolate cry that cleaves
      The natural storms--though _they_ are lifting
      God's strong cedar-roots like leaves,
      And the earthquake and the thunder,
      Neither keeping either under,
      Roar and hurtle through the glooms--
      And a few pale stars are drifting
      Past the dark, to disappear,
      What time, from the splitting tombs
      Gleamingly the dead arise,
      Viewing with their death-calmed eyes
      The elemental strategies,
      To witness, victory is the Lord's.
      Hear the wail o' the spirits! hear!

  _Zerah._ I hear alone the memory of his words.


EPILOGUE.


  I.

        My song is done.
  My voice that long hath faltered shall be still.
  The mystic darkness drops from Calvary's hill
  Into the common light of this day's sun.


  II.

  I see no more thy cross, O holy Slain!
  I hear no more the horror and the coil
      Of the great world's turmoil
  Feeling thy countenance _too still_,--nor yell
  Of demons sweeping past it to their prison.
  The skies that turned to darkness with thy pain
      Make now a summer's day;
  And on my changed ear that sabbath bell
      Records how CHRIST IS RISEN.


  III.

      And I--ah! what am I
  To counterfeit, with faculty earth-darkened,
        Seraphic brows of light
  And seraph language never used nor hearkened?
  Ah me! what word that seraphs say, could come
  From mouth so used to sighs, so soon to lie
  Sighless, because then breathless, in the tomb?


  IV.

  Bright ministers of God and grace--of grace
  Because of God! whether ye bow adown
  In your own heaven, before the living face
  Of him who died and deathless wears the crown,
  Or whether at this hour ye haply are
  Anear, around me, hiding in the night
  Of this permitted ignorance your light,
          This feebleness to spare,--
  Forgive me, that mine earthly heart should dare
  Shape images of unincarnate spirits
  And lay upon their burning lips a thought
  Cold with the weeping which mine earth inherits.
  And though ye find in such hoarse music, wrought
  To copy yours, a cadence all the while
  Of sin and sorrow--only pitying smile!
        Ye know to pity, well.


  V.

  _I_ too may haply smile another day
  At the far recollection of this lay,
  When God may call me in your midst to dwell,
  To hear your most sweet music's miracle
  And see your wondrous faces. May it be!
  For his remembered sake, the Slain on rood,
  Who rolled his earthly garment red in blood
  (Treading the wine-press) that the weak, like me,
  Before his heavenly throne should walk in white.

FOOTNOTE:

[D] "His angels he charged with folly."--_Job_ iv. 18.




PROMETHEUS BOUND

FROM THE GREEK OF AESCHYLUS


_PERSONS._

  PROMETHEUS.

  OCEANUS.

  HERMES.

  HEPHAESTUS.

  IO, _daughter of_ Inachus.

  STRENGTH _and_ FORCE.

  _Chorus of Sea Nymphs._




PROMETHEUS BOUND


SCENE.--_STRENGTH and FORCE, HEPHAESTUS and PROMETHEUS, at the
Rocks._

  _Strength._ We reach the utmost limit of the earth,
  The Scythian track, the desert without man.
  And now, Hephaestus, thou must needs fulfil
  The mandate of our Father, and with links
  Indissoluble of adamantine chains
  Fasten against this beetling precipice
  This guilty god. Because he filched away
  Thine own bright flower, the glory of plastic fire,
  And gifted mortals with it,--such a sin
  It doth behove he expiate to the gods,
  Learning to accept the empery of Zeus
  And leave off his old trick of loving man.

  _Hephaestus._ O Strength and Force, for you, our Zeus's will
  Presents a deed for doing, no more!--but _I_,
  I lack your daring, up this storm-rent chasm
  To fix with violent hands a kindred god,
  Howbeit necessity compels me so
  That I must dare it, and our Zeus commands
  With a most inevitable word. Ho, thou!
  High-thoughted son of Themis who is sage!
  Thee loth, I loth must rivet fast in chains
  Against this rocky height unclomb by man,
  Where never human voice nor face shall find
  Out thee who lov'st them, and thy beauty's flower,
  Scorched in the sun's clear heat, shall fade away.
  Night shall come up with garniture of stars
  To comfort thee with shadow, and the sun
  Disperse with retrickt beams the morning-frosts,
  But through all changes sense of present woe
  Shall vex thee sore, because with none of them
  There comes a hand to free. Such fruit is plucked
  From love of man! and in that thou, a god,
  Didst brave the wrath of gods and give away
  Undue respect to mortals, for that crime
  Thou art adjudged to guard this joyless rock,
  Erect, unslumbering, bending not the knee,
  And many a cry and unavailing moan
  To utter on the air. For Zeus is stern
  And new-made kings are cruel.

  _Strength._                    Be it so.
  Why loiter in vain pity? Why not hate
  A god the gods hate? one too who betrayed
  Thy glory unto men?

  _Hephaestus._             An awful thing
  Is kinship joined to friendship.

  _Strength._                      Grant it be;
  Is disobedience to the Father's word
  A possible thing? Dost quail not more for that?

  _Hephaestus._ Thou, at least, art a stern one: ever bold.

  _Strength._ Why, if I wept, it were no remedy;
  And do not _thou_ spend labour on the air
  To bootless uses.

  _Hephaestus._       Cursed handicraft!
  I curse and hate thee, O my craft!

  _Strength._                           Why hate
  Thy craft most plainly innocent of all
  These pending ills?

  _Hephaestus._         I would some other hand
  Were here to work it!

  _Strength._           All work hath its pain,
  Except to rule the gods. There is none free
  Except King Zeus.

  _Hephaestus._         I know it very well:
  I argue not against it.

  _Strength._             Why not, then,
  Make haste and lock the fetters over HIM
  Lest Zeus behold thee lagging?

  _Hephaestus._                    Here be chains.
  Zeus may behold these.

  _Strength._              Seize him: strike amain:
  Strike with the hammer on each side his hands--
  Rivet him to the rock.

  _Hephaestus._          The work is done,
  And thoroughly done.

  _Strength._           Still faster grapple him;
  Wedge him in deeper: leave no inch to stir.
  He's terrible for finding a way out
  From the irremediable.

  _Hephaestus._           Here's an arm, at least,
  Grappled past freeing.

  _Strength._           Now then, buckle me
  The other securely. Let this wise one learn
  He's duller than our Zeus.

  _Hephaestus._               Oh, none but he
  Accuse me justly.

  _Strength._       Now, straight through the chest,
  Take him and bite him with the clenching tooth
  Of the adamantine wedge, and rivet him.

  _Hephaestus._ Alas, Prometheus, what thou sufferest here
  I sorrow over.

  _Strength._    Dost thou flinch again
  And breathe groans for the enemies of Zeus?
  Beware lest thine own pity find thee out.

  _Hephaestus._ Thou dost behold a spectacle that turns
  The sight o' the eyes to pity.

  _Strength._                      I behold
  A sinner suffer his sin's penalty.
  But lash the thongs about his sides.

  _Hephaestus._                        So much,
  I must do. Urge no farther than I must.

  _Strength._ Ay, but I _will_ urge!--and, with shout on shout,
  Will hound thee at this quarry. Get thee down
  And ring amain the iron round his legs.

  _Hephaestus._ That work was not long doing.

  _Strength._                                 Heavily now
  Let fall the strokes upon the perforant gyves:
  For He who rates the work has a heavy hand.

  _Hephaestus._ Thy speech is savage as thy shape.

  _Strength._                                   Be thou
  Gentle and tender! but revile not me
  For the firm will and the untruckling hate.

  _Hephaestus._ Let us go. He is netted round with chains.

  _Strength._ Here, now, taunt on! and having spoiled the gods
  Of honours, crown withal thy mortal men
  Who live a whole day out. Why how could _they_
  Draw off from thee one single of thy griefs?
  Methinks the Daemons gave thee a wrong name,
  "Prometheus," which means Providence,--because
  Thou dost thyself need providence to see
  Thy roll and ruin from the top of doom.

  _Prometheus (alone)._ O holy AEther, and swift-winged Winds,
  And River-wells, and laughter innumerous
  Of yon sea-waves! Earth, mother of us all,
  And all-viewing cyclic Sun, I cry on you,--
  Behold me, a god, what I endure from gods!
      Behold, with throe on throe,
      How, wasted by this woe,
  I wrestle down the myriad years of time!
      Behold, how fast around me,
  The new King of the happy ones sublime
  Has flung the chain he forged, has shamed and bound me!
  Woe, woe! to-day's woe and the coming morrow's
  I cover with one groan. And where is found me
      A limit to these sorrows?
  And yet what word do I say? I have foreknown
  Clearly all things that should be; nothing done
  Comes sudden to my soul; and I must bear
  What is ordained with patience, being aware
      Necessity doth front the universe
      With an invincible gesture. Yet this curse
      Which strikes me now, I find it hard to brave
      In silence or in speech. Because I gave
      Honour to mortals, I have yoked my soul
      To this compelling fate. Because I stole
      The secret fount of fire, whose bubbles went
      Over the ferule's brim, and manward sent
      Art's mighty means and perfect rudiment,
      That sin I expiate in this agony,
      Hung here in fetters, 'neath the blanching sky.
          Ah, ah me! what a sound,
  What a fragrance sweeps up from a pinion unseen
  Of a god, or a mortal, or nature between,
  Sweeping up to this rock where the earth has her bound,
  To have sight of my pangs or some guerdon obtain.
  Lo, a god in the anguish, a god in the chain!
          The god, Zeus hateth sore
          And his gods hate again,
      As many as tread on his glorified floor,
      Because I loved mortals too much evermore.
      Alas me! what a murmur and motion I hear,
          As of birds flying near!
          And the air undersings
          The light stroke of their wings--
      And all life that approaches I wait for in fear.

  _Chorus of Sea Nymphs, 1st Strophe._
          Fear nothing! our troop
          Floats lovingly up
          With a quick-oaring stroke
          Of wings steered to the rock,
  Having softened the soul of our father below.
  For the gales of swift-bearing have sent me a sound,
  And the clank of the iron, the malleted blow,
          Smote down the profound
          Of my caverns of old,
  And struck the red light in a blush from my brow,--
  Till I sprang up unsandaled, in haste to behold,
  And rushed forth on my chariot of wings manifold.

  _Prometheus._ Alas me!--alas me!
  Ye offspring of Tethys who bore at her breast
  Many children, and eke of Oceanus, he
  Coiling still around earth with perpetual unrest!
          Behold me and see
        How transfixed with the fang
        Of a fetter I hang
  On the high-jutting rocks of this fissure and keep
  An uncoveted watch o'er the world and the deep.

  _Chorus, 1st Antistrophe._
  I behold thee, Prometheus; yet now, yet now,
  A terrible cloud whose rain is tears
  Sweeps over mine eyes that witness how
          Thy body appears
  Hung awaste on the rocks by infrangible chains:
  For new is the Hand, new the rudder that steers
  The ship of Olympus through surge and wind--
  And of old things passed, no track is behind.

  _Prometheus._ Under earth, under Hades
      Where the home of the shade is,
    All into the deep, deep Tartarus,
      I would he had hurled me adown.
  I would he had plunged me, fastened thus
  In the knotted chain with the savage clang,
  All into the dark where there should be none,
  Neither god nor another, to laugh and see.
      But now the winds sing through and shake
      The hurtling chains wherein I hang,
      And I, in my naked sorrows, make
        Much mirth for my enemy.

  _Chorus, 2nd Strophe._
    Nay! who of the gods hath a heart so stern
      As to use thy woe for a mock and mirth?
    Who would not turn more mild to learn
      Thy sorrows? who of the heaven and earth
              Save Zeus? But he
              Right wrathfully
        Bears on his sceptral soul unbent
        And rules thereby the heavenly seed,
        Nor will he pause till he content
        His thirsty heart in a finished deed;
        Or till Another shall appear,
        To win by fraud, to seize by fear
        The hard-to-be-captured government.

  _Prometheus._ Yet even of _me_ he shall have need,
        That monarch of the blessed seed,
        Of me, of me, who now am cursed
              By his fetters dire,--
        To wring my secret out withal
          And learn by whom his sceptre shall
        Be filched from him--as was, at first,
              His heavenly fire.
        But he never shall enchant me
          With his honey-lipped persuasion;
        Never, never shall he daunt me
          With the oath and threat of passion
        Into speaking as they want me,
        Till he loose this savage chain,
          And accept the expiation
        Of my sorrow, in his pain.

  _Chorus, 2nd Antistrophe._
        Thou art, sooth, a brave god,
          And, for all thou hast borne
        From the stroke of the rod,
          Nought relaxest from scorn.
        But thou speakest unto me
          Too free and unworn;
        And a terror strikes through me
          And festers my soul
          And I fear, in the roll
        Of the storm, for thy fate
          In the ship far from shore:
  Since the son of Saturnus is hard in his hate
    And unmoved in his heart evermore.

  _Prometheus._ I know that Zeus is stern;
  I know he metes his justice by his will;
  And yet, his soul shall learn
  More softness when once broken by this ill:
  And curbing his unconquerable vaunt
  He shall rush on in fear to meet with me
  Who rush to meet with him in agony,
  To issues of harmonious covenant.

  _Chorus._ Remove the veil from all things and relate
  The story to us,--of what crime accused,
  Zeus smites thee with dishonourable pangs.
  Speak: if to teach us do not grieve thyself.

  _Prometheus._ The utterance of these things is torture to me,
  But so, too, is their silence; each way lies
  Woe strong as fate.
                      When gods began with wrath,
  And war rose up between their starry brows,
  Some choosing to cast Chronos from his throne
  That Zeus might king it there, and some in haste
  With opposite oaths that they would have no Zeus
  To rule the gods for ever,--I, who brought
  The counsel I thought meetest, could not move
  The Titans, children of the Heaven and Earth,
  What time, disdaining in their rugged souls
  My subtle machinations, they assumed
  It was an easy thing for force to take
  The mastery of fate. My mother, then,
  Who is called not only Themis but Earth too,
  (Her single beauty joys in many names)
  Did teach me with reiterant prophecy
  What future should be, and how conquering gods
  Should not prevail by strength and violence
  But by guile only. When I told them so,
  They would not deign to contemplate the truth
  On all sides round; whereat I deemed it best
  To lead my willing mother upwardly
  And set my Themis face to face with Zeus
  As willing to receive her. Tartarus,
  With its abysmal cloister of the Dark,
  Because I gave that counsel, covers up
  The antique Chronos and his siding hosts,
  And, by that counsel helped, the king of gods
  Hath recompensed me with these bitter pangs:
  For kingship wears a cancer at the heart,--
  Distrust in friendship. Do ye also ask
  What crime it is for which he tortures me?
  That shall be clear before you. When at first
  He filled his father's throne, he instantly
  Made various gifts of glory to the gods
  And dealt the empire out. Alone of men,
  Of miserable men, he took no count,
  But yearned to sweep their track off from the world
  And plant a newer race there. Not a god
  Resisted such desire except myself.
  _I_ dared it! _I_ drew mortals back to light,
  From meditated ruin deep as hell!
  For which wrong, I am bent down in these pangs
  Dreadful to suffer, mournful to behold,
  And I, who pitied man, am thought myself
  Unworthy of pity; while I render out
  Deep rhythms of anguish 'neath the harping hand
  That strikes me thus--a sight to shame your Zeus!

  _Chorus._ Hard as thy chains and cold as all these rocks
  Is he, Prometheus, who withholds his heart

  From joining in thy woe. I yearned before
  To fly this sight; and, now I gaze on it,
  I sicken inwards.

  _Prometheus._       To my friends, indeed,
  I must be a sad sight.

  _Chorus._               And didst thou sin
  No more than so?

  _Prometheus._     I did restrain besides
  My mortals from premeditating death.

  _Chorus._ How didst thou medicine the plague-fear of death?

  _Prometheus._ I set blind Hopes to inhabit in their house.

  _Chorus._ By that gift thou didst help thy mortals well.

  _Prometheus._ I gave them also fire.

  _Chorus._                            And have they now,
  Those creatures of a day, the red-eyed fire?

  _Prometheus._ They have: and shall learn by it many arts.

  _Chorus._ And truly for such sins Zeus tortures thee
  And will remit no anguish? Is there set
  No limit before thee to thine agony?

  _Prometheus._ No other: only what seems good to HIM.

  _Chorus._ And how will it seem good? what hope remains?
  Seest thou not that thou hast sinned? But that thou hast sinned
  It glads me not to speak of, and grieves thee:
  Then let it pass from both, and seek thyself
  Some outlet from distress.

  _Prometheus._               It is in truth
  An easy thing to stand aloof from pain
  And lavish exhortation and advice
  On one vexed sorely by it. I have known
  All in prevision. By my choice, my choice,
  I freely sinned--I will confess my sin--
  And helping mortals, found my own despair.
  I did not think indeed that I should pine
  Beneath such pangs against such skyey rocks,
  Doomed to this drear hill and no neighbouring
  Of any life: but mourn not ye for griefs
  I bear to-day: hear rather, dropping down
  To the plain, how other woes creep on to me,
  And learn the consummation of my doom.
  Beseech you, nymphs, beseech you, grieve for me
  Who now am grieving; for Grief walks the earth,
  And sits down at the foot of each by turns.

  _Chorus._ We hear the deep clash of thy words,
        Prometheus, and obey.
  And I spring with a rapid foot away
  From the rushing car and the holy air,
        The track of birds;
  And I drop to the rugged ground and there
    Await the tale of thy despair.

_OCEANUS enters._

  _Oceanus._ I reach the bourn of my weary road
      Where I may see and answer thee,
      Prometheus, in thine agony.
  On the back of the quick-winged bird I glode,
        And I bridled him in
        With the will of a god.
  Behold, thy sorrow aches in me
    Constrained by the force of kin.
  Nay, though that tie were all undone,
  For the life of none beneath the sun
  Would I seek a larger benison
    Than I seek for thine.
  And thou shalt learn my words are truth,--
  That no fair parlance of the mouth
    Grows falsely out of mine.
  Now give me a deed to prove my faith;
  For no faster friend is named in breath
    Than I, Oceanus, am thine.

  _Prometheus._ Ha! what has brought thee? Hast thou also come
  To look upon my woe? How hast thou dared
  To leave the depths called after thee, the caves
  Self-hewn and self-roofed with spontaneous rock,
  To visit earth, the mother of my chain?
  Hast come indeed to view my doom and mourn
  That I should sorrow thus? Gaze on, and see
  How I, the fast friend of your Zeus,--how I
  The erector of the empire in his hand,
  Am bent beneath that hand, in this despair.

  _Oceanus._ Prometheus, I behold: and I would fain
  Exhort thee, though already subtle enough,
  To a better wisdom. Titan, know thyself,
  And take new softness to thy manners since
  A new king rules the gods. If words like these,
  Harsh words and trenchant, thou wilt fling abroad,
  Zeus haply, though he sit so far and high,
  May hear thee do it, and so, this wrath of his
  Which now affects thee fiercely, shall appear
  A mere child's sport at vengeance. Wretched god,
  Rather dismiss the passion which thou hast,
  And seek a change from grief. Perhaps I seem
  To address thee with old saws and outworn sense,--
  Yet such a curse, Prometheus, surely waits
  On lips that speak too proudly: thou, meantime,
  Art none the meeker, nor dost yield a jot
  To evil circumstance, preparing still
  To swell the account of grief with other griefs
  Than what are borne. Beseech thee, use me then
  For counsel: do not spurn against the pricks,--
  Seeing that who reigns, reigns by cruelty
  Instead of right. And now, I go from hence,
  And will endeavour if a power of mine
  Can break thy fetters through. For thee,--be calm,
  And smooth thy words from passion. Knowest thou not
  Of perfect knowledge, thou who knowest too much,
  That where the tongue wags, ruin never lags?

  _Prometheus._ I gratulate thee who hast shared and dared
  All things with me, except their penalty.
  Enough so! leave these thoughts. It cannot be
  That thou shouldst move HIM. HE may _not_ be moved;
  And _thou_ beware of sorrow on this road.

  _Oceanus._ Ay! ever wiser for another's use
  Than thine! the event, and not the prophecy,
  Attests it to me. Yet where now I rush,
  Thy wisdom hath no power to drag me back;
  Because I glory, glory, to go hence
  And win for thee deliverance from thy pangs,
  As a free gift from Zeus.

  _Prometheus._             Why there, again,
  I give thee gratulation and applause.
  Thou lackest no goodwill. But, as for deeds,
  Do nought! 'twere all done vainly; helping nought,
  Whatever thou wouldst do. Rather take rest
  And keep thyself from evil. If I grieve,
  I do not therefore wish to multiply
  The griefs of others. Verily, not so!
  For still my brother's doom doth vex my soul,--
  My brother Atlas, standing in the west,
  Shouldering the column of the heaven and earth,
  A difficult burden! I have also seen,
  And pitied as I saw, the earth-born one,
  The inhabitant of old Cilician caves,
  The great war-monster of the hundred heads,
  (All taken and bowed beneath the violent Hand,)
  Typhon the fierce, who did resist the gods,
  And, hissing slaughter from his dreadful jaws,
  Flash out ferocious glory from his eyes
  As if to storm the throne of Zeus. Whereat,
  The sleepless arrow of Zeus flew straight at him,
  The headlong bolt of thunder breathing flame,
  And struck him downward from his eminence
  Of exultation; through the very soul,
  It struck him, and his strength was withered up
  To ashes, thunder-blasted. Now he lies
  A helpless trunk supinely, at full length
  Beside the strait of ocean, spurred into
  By roots of AEtna; high upon whose tops
  Hephaestus sits and strikes the flashing ore.
  From thence the rivers of fire shall burst away
  Hereafter, and devour with savage jaws
  The equal plains of fruitful Sicily,
  Such passion he shall boil back in hot darts
  Of an insatiate fury and sough of flame,
  Fallen Typhon,--howsoever struck and charred
  By Zeus's bolted thunder. But for thee,
  Thou art not so unlearned as to need
  My teaching--let thy knowledge save thyself.
  _I_ quaff the full cup of a present doom,
  And wait till Zeus hath quenched his will in wrath.

  _Oceanus._ Prometheus, art thou ignorant of this,
  That words do medicine anger?

  _Prometheus._                    If the word
  With seasonable softness touch the soul
  And, where the parts are ulcerous, sear them not
  By any rudeness.

  _Oceanus._        With a noble aim
  To dare as nobly--is there harm in _that_?
  Dost thou discern it? Teach me.

  _Prometheus._                      I discern
  Vain aspiration, unresultive work.

  _Oceanus._ Then suffer me to bear the brunt of this!
  Since it is profitable that one who is wise
  Should seem not wise at all.

  _Prometheus._                   And such would seem
  My very crime.

  _Oceanus._      In truth thine argument
  Sends me back home.

  _Prometheus._           Lest any lament for me
  Should cast thee down to hate.

  _Oceanus._                     The hate of him
  Who sits a new king on the absolute throne?

  _Prometheus._ Beware of him, lest thine heart grieve by him.

  _Oceanus._ Thy doom, Prometheus, be my teacher!

  _Prometheus._                                   Go.
  Depart--beware--and keep the mind thou hast.

  _Oceanus._ Thy words drive after, as I rush before.
  Lo! my four-footed bird sweeps smooth and wide
  The flats of air with balanced pinions, glad
  To bend his knee at home in the ocean-stall.

[_OCEANUS departs._

  _Chorus, 1st Strophe._
      I moan thy fate, I moan for thee,
        Prometheus! From my eyes too tender,
      Drop after drop incessantly
        The tears of my heart's pity render
      My cheeks wet from their fountains free;
      Because that Zeus, the stern and cold,
        Whose law is taken from his breast,
        Uplifts his sceptre manifest
          Over the gods of old.

  _1st Antistrophe._
          All the land is moaning
      With a murmured plaint to-day;
          All the mortal nations
          Having habitations
        In the holy Asia
          Are a dirge entoning
      For thine honour and thy brothers',
      Once majestic beyond others
          In the old belief,--
      Now are groaning in the groaning
          Of thy deep-voiced grief.

  _2nd Strophe._
      Mourn the maids inhabitant
          Of the Colchian land,
      Who with white, calm bosoms stand
          In the battle's roar:
      Mourn the Scythian tribes that haunt
      The verge of earth, Maeotis' shore.

  _2nd Antistrophe._
          Yea! Arabia's battle-crown,
          And dwellers in the beetling town
          Mount Caucasus sublimely nears,--
          An iron squadron, thundering down
            With the sharp-prowed spears.

      But one other before, have I seen to remain
          By invincible pain
  Bound and vanquished,--one Titan! 'twas Atlas, who bears
  In a curse from the gods, by that strength of his own
          Which he evermore wears,
  The weight of the heaven on his shoulder alone,
          While he sighs up the stars;
  And the tides of the ocean wail bursting their bars,--
          Murmurs still the profound,
  And black Hades roars up through the chasm of the ground,
  And the fountains of pure-running rivers moan low
          In a pathos of woe.

  _Prometheus._ Beseech you, think not I am silent thus
  Through pride or scorn. I only gnaw my heart
  With meditation, seeing myself so wronged.
  For see--their honours to these new-made gods,
  What other gave but I, and dealt them out
  With distribution? Ay--but here I am dumb!
  For here, I should repeat your knowledge to you,
  If I spake aught. List rather to the deeds
  I did for mortals; how, being fools before,
  I made them wise and true in aim of soul.
  And let me tell you--not as taunting men,
  But teaching you the intention of my gifts,
  How, first beholding, they beheld in vain,
  And hearing, heard not, but, like shapes in dreams,
  Mixed all things wildly down the tedious time,
  Nor knew to build a house against the sun
  With wickered sides, nor any woodcraft knew,
  But lived, like silly ants, beneath the ground
  In hollow caves unsunned. There, came to them
  No steadfast sign of winter, nor of spring
  Flower-perfumed, nor of summer full of fruit,
  But blindly and lawlessly they did all things,
  Until I taught them how the stars do rise
  And set in mystery, and devised for them
  Number, the inducer of philosophies,
  The synthesis of Letters, and, beside,
  The artificer of all things, Memory,
  That sweet Muse-mother. I was first to yoke
  The servile beasts in couples, carrying
  An heirdom of man's burdens on their backs.
  I joined to chariots, steeds, that love the bit
  They champ at--the chief pomp of golden ease.
  And none but I originated ships,
  The seaman's chariots, wandering on the brine
  With linen wings. And I--oh, miserable!--
  Who did devise for mortals all these arts,
  Have no device left now to save myself
  From the woe I suffer.

  _Chorus._               Most unseemly woe
  Thou sufferest, and dost stagger from the sense
  Bewildered! like a bad leech falling sick
  Thou art faint at soul, and canst not find the drugs
  Required to save thyself.

  _Prometheus._            Hearken the rest,
  And marvel further, what more arts and means
  I did invent,--this, greatest: if a man
  Fell sick, there was no cure, nor esculent
  Nor chrism nor liquid, but for lack of drugs
  Men pined and wasted, till I showed them all
  Those mixtures of emollient remedies
  Whereby they might be rescued from disease.
  I fixed the various rules of mantic art,
  Discerned the vision from the common dream,
  Instructed them in vocal auguries
  Hard to interpret, and defined as plain
  The wayside omens,--flights of crook-clawed birds,--
  Showed which are, by their nature, fortunate,
  And which not so, and what the food of each,
  And what the hates, affections, social needs,
  Of all to one another,--taught what sign
  Of visceral lightness, coloured to a shade,
  May charm the genial gods, and what fair spots
  Commend the lung and liver. Burning so
  The limbs encased in fat, and the long chine,
  I led my mortals on to an art abstruse,
  And cleared their eyes to the image in the fire,
  Erst filmed in dark. Enough said now of this
  For the other helps of man hid underground,
  The iron and the brass, silver and gold,
  Can any dare affirm he found them out
  Before me? none, I know! unless he choose
  To lie in his vaunt. In one word learn the whole,--
  That all arts came to mortals from Prometheus.

  _Chorus._ Give mortals now no inexpedient help,
  Neglecting thine own sorrow. I have hope still
  To see thee, breaking from the fetter here,
  Stand up as strong as Zeus.

  _Prometheus._               This ends not thus,
  The oracular fate ordains. I must be bowed
  By infinite woes and pangs, to escape this chain
  Necessity is stronger than mine art.

  _Chorus._ Who holds the helm of that Necessity?

  _Prometheus._ The threefold Fates and the unforgetting Furies.

  _Chorus._ Is Zeus less absolute than these are?

  _Prometheus._                                    Yea,
  And therefore cannot fly what is ordained.

  _Chorus._ What is ordained for Zeus, except to be
  A king for ever?

  _Prometheus._     'Tis too early yet
  For thee to learn it: ask no more.

  _Chorus._                         Perhaps
  Thy secret may be something holy?

  _Prometheus._                         Turn
  To another matter: this, it is not time
  To speak abroad, but utterly to veil
  In silence. For by that same secret kept,
  I 'scape this chain's dishonour and its woe.

  _Chorus, 1st Strophe._
              Never, oh never
              May Zeus, the all-giver,
              Wrestle down from his throne
              In that might of his own
              To antagonize mine!
              Nor let me delay
              As I bend on my way
              Toward the gods of the shrine
          Where the altar is full
          Of the blood of the bull,
          Near the tossing brine
          Of Ocean my father.
    May no sin be sped in the word that is said,
          But my vow be rather
              Consummated,
    Nor evermore fail, nor evermore pine.

  _1st Antistrophe._
          'Tis sweet to have
            Life lengthened out
          With hopes proved brave
            By the very doubt,
          Till the spirit enfold
    Those manifest joys which were foretold.
          But I thrill to behold
            Thee, victim doomed,
          By the countless cares
          And the drear despairs
            Forever consumed,--
    And all because thou, who art fearless now
          Of Zeus above,
    Didst overflow for mankind below
          With a free-souled, reverent love.
      Ah friend, behold and see!
    What's all the beauty of humanity?
          Can it be fair?
    What's all the strength? is it strong?
      And what hope can they bear,
    These dying livers--living one day long?
      Ah, seest thou not, my friend,
          How feeble and slow
          And like a dream, doth go
    This poor blind manhood, drifted from its end?
      And how no mortal wranglings can confuse
          The harmony of Zeus?

    Prometheus, I have learnt these things
    From the sorrow in thy face.
      Another song did fold its wings
    Upon my lips in other days,
    When round the bath and round the bed
    The hymeneal chant instead
      I sang for thee, and smiled,--
    And thou didst lead, with gifts and vows,
      Hesione, my father's child,
    To be thy wedded spouse.

_IO enters_.

  _Io._ What land is this? what people is here?
  And who is he that writhes, I see,
          In the rock-hung chain?
  Now what is the crime that hath brought thee to pain?
  Now what is the land--make answer free--
  Which I wander through, in my wrong and fear?
          Ah! ah! ah me!
  The gad-fly strength to agony!
  O Earth, keep off that phantasm pale
  Of earth-born Argus!--ah!--I quail
          When my soul descries
  That herdsman with the myriad eyes
  Which seem, as he comes, one crafty eye
  Graves hide him not, though he should die,
  But he doggeth me in my misery
  From the roots of death, on high--on high--
  And along the sands of the siding deep,
  All famine-worn, he follows me,
  And his waxen reed doth undersound
          The waters round
  And giveth a measure that giveth sleep.

          Woe, woe, woe!
  Where shall my weary course be done?
  What wouldst thou with me, Saturn's son?
  And in what have I sinned, that I should go
  Thus yoked to grief by thine hand for ever?
          Ah! ah! dost vex me so
            That I madden and shiver
            Stung through with dread?
          Flash the fire down to burn me!
          Heave the earth up to cover me!
  Plunge me in the deep, with the salt waves over me,
          That the sea-beasts may be fed!
          O king, do not spurn me
              In my prayer!
          For this wandering everlonger, evermore,
              Hath overworn me,
          And I know not on what shore
          I may rest from my despair.

  _Chorus._ Hearest thou what the ox-horned maiden saith?

  _Prometheus._ How could I choose but hearken what she saith,
  The phrensied maiden?--Inachus's child?--
  Who love-warms Zeus's heart, and now is lashed
  By Here's hate along the unending ways?

  _Io._ Who taught thee to articulate that name,--
          My father's? Speak to his child
          By grief and shame defiled!
  Who art thou, victim, thou who dost acclaim
  Mine anguish in true words on the wide air,
  And callest too by name the curse that came
              From Here unaware,
  To waste and pierce me with its maddening goad?
          Ah--ah--I leap
  With the pang of the hungry--I bound on the road--
          I am driven by my doom--
          I am overcome
  By the wrath of an enemy strong and deep!
  Are any of those who have tasted pain,
          Alas! as wretched as I?
  Now tell me plain, doth aught remain
  For my soul to endure beneath the sky?
  Is there any help to be holpen by?
  If knowledge be in thee, let it be said!
          Cry aloud--cry
  To the wandering, woful maid!

  _Prometheus._ Whatever thou wouldst learn I will declare,--
  No riddle upon my lips, but such straight words
  As friends should use to each other when they talk.
  Thou seest Prometheus, who gave mortals fire.

  _Io._ O common Help of all men, known of all,
  O miserable Prometheus,--for what cause
  Dost thou endure thus?

  _Prometheus._            I have done with wail
  For my own griefs, but lately.

  _Io._                          Wilt thou not
  Vouchsafe the boon to me?

  _Prometheus._                Say what thou wilt,
  For I vouchsafe all.

  _Io._                Speak then, and reveal
  Who shut thee in this chasm.

  _Prometheus._                 The will of Zeus,
  The hand of his Hephaestus.

  _Io._                          And what crime
  Dost expiate so?

  _Prometheus._    Enough for thee I have told
  In so much only.

  _Io._            Nay, but show besides
  The limit of my wandering, and the time
  Which yet is lacking to fulfil my grief.

  _Prometheus._ Why, not to know were better than to know
  For such as thou.

  _Io._             Beseech thee, blind me not
  To that which I must suffer.

  _Prometheus._                If I do,
  The reason is not that I grudge a boon.

  _Io._ What reason, then, prevents thy speaking out?

  _Prometheus._ No grudging; but a fear to break thine heart.

  _Io._ Less care for me, I pray thee. Certainty
  I count for advantage.

  _Prometheus._         Thou wilt have it so,
  And therefore I must speak. Now hear--

  _Chorus._                                Not yet.
  Give half the guerdon my way. Let us learn
  First, what the curse is that befell the maid,--
  Her own voice telling her own wasting woes:
  The sequence of that anguish shall await
  The teaching of thy lips.

  _Prometheus._           It doth behove
  That thou, Maid Io, shouldst vouchsafe to these
  The grace they pray,--the more, because they are called
  Thy father's sisters: since to open out
  And mourn out grief where it is possible
  To draw a tear from the audience, is a work
  That pays its own price well.

  _Io._                         I cannot choose
  But trust you, nymphs, and tell you all ye ask,
  In clear words--though I sob amid my speech
  In speaking of the storm-curse sent from Zeus,
  And of my beauty, from what height it took
  Its swoop on me, poor wretch! left thus deformed
  And monstrous to your eyes. For evermore
  Around my virgin-chamber, wandering went
  The nightly visions which entreated me
  With syllabled smooth sweetness.--"Blessed maid,
  Why lengthen out thy maiden hours when fate
  Permits the noblest spousal in the world?
  When Zeus burns with the arrow of thy love
  And fain would touch thy beauty?--Maiden, thou
  Despise not Zeus! depart to Lerne's mead
  That's green around thy father's flocks and stalls,
  Until the passion of the heavenly Eye
  Be quenched in sight." Such dreams did all night long
  Constrain me--me, unhappy!--till I dared
  To tell my father how they trod the dark
  With visionary steps. Whereat he sent
  His frequent heralds to the Pythian fane,
  And also to Dodona, and inquired
  How best, by act or speech, to please the gods.
  The same returning brought back oracles
  Of doubtful sense, indefinite response,
  Dark to interpret; but at last there came
  To Inachus an answer that was clear,
  Thrown straight as any bolt, and spoken out--
  This--"he should drive me from my home and land
  And bid me wander to the extreme verge
  Of all the earth--or, if he willed it not,
  Should have a thunder with a fiery eye
  Leap straight from Zeus to burn up all his race
  To the last root of it." By which Loxian word
  Subdued, he drove me forth and shut me out,
  He loth, me loth,--but Zeus's violent bit
  Compelled him to the deed: when instantly
  My body and soul were changed and distraught,
  And, horned as ye see, and spurred along
  By the fanged insect, with a maniac leap
  I rushed on to Cenchrea's limpid stream
  And Lerne's fountain-water. There, the earth-born,
  The herdsman Argus, most immitigable
  Of wrath, did find me out, and track me out
  With countless eyes set staring at my steps:
  And though an unexpected sudden doom
  Drew him from life, I, curse-tormented still,
  Am driven from land to land before the scourge
  The gods hold o'er me. So thou hast heard the past,
  And if a bitter future thou canst tell,
  Speak on. I charge thee, do not flatter me
  Through pity, with false words; for, in my mind,
  Deceiving works more shame than torturing doth.

  _Chorus._
            Ah! silence here!
            Nevermore, nevermore
            Would I languish for
            The stranger's word
            To thrill in mine ear--
      Nevermore for the wrong and the woe and the fear
                So hard to behold,
                So cruel to bear,
      Piercing my soul with a double-edged sword
                Of a sliding cold.
                Ah Fate! ah me!
                I shudder to see
      This wandering maid in her agony.

  _Prometheus._ Grief is too quick in thee and fear too full:
  Be patient till thou hast learnt the rest.

  _Chorus._                               Speak: teach
  To those who are sad already, it seems sweet,
  By clear foreknowledge to make perfect, pain.

  _Prometheus._ The boon ye asked me first was lightly won,--
  For first ye asked the story of this maid's grief
  As her own lips might tell it. Now remains
  To list what other sorrows she so young
  Must bear from Here. Inachus's child,
  O thou! drop down thy soul my weighty words,
  And measure out the landmarks which are set
  To end thy wandering. Toward the orient sun
  First turn thy face from mine and journey on
  Along the desert flats till thou shalt come
  Where Scythia's shepherd peoples dwell aloft,
  Perched in wheeled waggons under woven roofs,
  And twang the rapid arrow past the bow--
  Approach them not; but siding in thy course
  The rugged shore-rocks resonant to the sea,
  Depart that country. On the left hand dwell
  The iron-workers, called the Chalybes,
  Of whom beware, for certes they are uncouth
  And nowise bland to strangers. Reaching so
  The stream Hybristes (well the _scorner_ called),
  Attempt no passage,--it is hard to pass,--
  Or ere thou come to Caucasus itself,
  That highest of mountains, where the river leaps
  The precipice in his strength. Thou must toil up
  Those mountain-tops that neighbour with the stars,
  And tread the south way, and draw near, at last,
  The Amazonian host that hateth man,
  Inhabitants of Themiscyra, close
  Upon Thermodon, where the sea's rough jaw
  Doth gnash at Salmydessa and provide
  A cruel host to seamen, and to ships
  A stepdame. They with unreluctant hand
  Shall lead thee on and on, till thou arrive
  Just where the ocean-gates show narrowest
  On the Cimmerian isthmus. Leaving which,
  Behoves thee swim with fortitude of soul
  The strait Maeotis. Ay, and evermore
  That traverse shall be famous on men's lips,
  That strait, called Bosphorus, the horned-one's road,
  So named because of thee, who so wilt pass
  From Europe's plain to Asia's continent.
  How think ye, nymphs? the king of gods appears
  Impartial in ferocious deeds? Behold!
  The god desirous of this mortal's love
  Hath cursed her with these wanderings. Ah, fair child,
  Thou hast met a bitter groom for bridal troth!
  For all thou yet hast heard can only prove
  The incompleted prelude of thy doom.

  _Io._ Ah, ah!

  _Prometheus._ Is 't thy turn, now, to shriek and moan?
  How wilt thou, when thou hast hearkened what remains?

  _Chorus._ Besides the grief thou hast told can aught remain?

  _Prometheus._ A sea--of foredoomed evil worked to storm.

  _Io._ What boots my life, then? why not cast myself
  Down headlong from this miserable rock,
  That, dashed against the flats, I may redeem
  My soul from sorrow? Better once to die
  Than day by day to suffer.

  _Prometheus._             Verily,
  It would be hard for thee to bear my woe
  For whom it is appointed not to die.
  Death frees from woe: but I before me see
  In all my far prevision not a bound
  To all I suffer, ere that Zeus shall fall
  From being a king.

  _Io._                And can it ever be
  That Zeus shall fall from empire?

  _Prometheus._                       _Thou_, methinks,
  Wouldst take some joy to see it.

  _Io._                                Could I choose?
  _I_ who endure such pangs now, by that god!

  _Prometheus._ Learn from me, therefore, that the event shall be.

  _Io._ By whom shall his imperial sceptred hand
  Be emptied so?

  _Prometheus._ Himself shall spoil himself,
  Through his idiotic counsels.

  _Io._                      How? declare:
  Unless the word bring evil.

  _Prometheus._            He shall wed;
  And in the marriage-bond be joined to grief.

  _Io._ A heavenly bride--or human? Speak it out
  If it be utterable.

  _Prometheus._      Why should I say which?
  It ought not to be uttered, verily.

  _Io._                              Then
  It is his wife shall tear him from his throne?

  _Prometheus._ It is his wife shall bear a son to him,
  More mighty than the father.

  _Io._                          From this doom
  Hath he no refuge?

  _Prometheus._       None: or ere that I,
  Loosed from these fetters--

  _Io._                    Yea--but who shall loose
  While Zeus is adverse?

  _Prometheus._         One who is born of thee:
  It is ordained so.

  _Io._             What is this thou sayest?
  A son of mine shall liberate thee from woe?

  _Prometheus._ After ten generations, count three more,
  And find him in the third.

  _Io._                       The oracle
  Remains obscure.

  _Prometheus._ And search it not, to learn
  Thine own griefs from it.

  _Io._                 Point me not to a good,
  To leave me straight bereaved.

  _Prometheus._               I am prepared
  To grant thee one of two things.

  _Io._                          But which two?
  Set them before me; grant me power to choose.

  _Prometheus._ I grant it, choose now: shall I name aloud
  What griefs remain to wound thee, or what hand
  Shall save me out of mine?

  _Chorus._                   Vouchsafe, O god,
  The one grace of the twain to her who prays;
  The next to me; and turn back neither prayer
  Dishonour'd by denial. To herself
  Recount the future wandering of her feet;
  Then point me to the looser of thy chain,
  Because I yearn to know him.

  _Prometheus._                    Since ye will,
  Of absolute will, this knowledge, I will set
  No contrary against it, nor keep back
  A word of all ye ask for. Io, first
  To thee I must relate thy wandering course
  Far winding. As I tell it, write it down
  In thy soul's book of memories. When thou hast past
  The refluent bound that parts two continents,
  Track on the footsteps of the orient sun
  In his own fire, across the roar of seas,--
  Fly till thou hast reached the Gorgonaean flats
  Beside Cisthene. There, the Phorcides,
  Three ancient maidens, live, with shape of swan,
  One tooth between them, and one common eye:
  On whom the sun doth never look at all
  With all his rays, nor evermore the moon
  When she looks through the night. Anear to whom
  Are the Gorgon sisters three, enclothed with wings,
  With twisted snakes for ringlets, man-abhorred:
  There is no mortal gazes in their face
  And gazing can breathe on. I speak of such
  To guard thee from their horror. Ay, and list
  Another tale of a dreadful sight; beware
  The Griffins, those unbarking dogs of Zeus,
  Those sharp-mouthed dogs!--and the Arimaspian host
  Of one-eyed horsemen, habiting beside
  The river of Pluto that runs bright with gold:
  Approach them not, beseech thee! Presently
  Thou'lt come to a distant land, a dusky tribe
  Of dwellers at the fountain of the Sun,
  Whence flows the river AEthiops; wind along
  Its banks and turn off at the cataracts,
  Just as the Nile pours from the Bybline hills
  His holy and sweet wave; his course shall guide
  Thine own to that triangular Nile-ground
  Where, Io, is ordained for thee and thine
  A lengthened exile. Have I said in this
  Aught darkly or incompletely?--now repeat
  The question, make the knowledge fuller! Lo,
  I have more leisure than I covet, here.

  _Chorus._ If thou canst tell us aught that's left untold,
  Or loosely told, of her most dreary flight,
  Declare it straight: but if thou hast uttered all,
  Grant us that latter grace for which we prayed,
  Remembering how we prayed it.

  _Prometheus._                   She has heard
  The uttermost of her wandering. There it ends.
  But that she may be certain not to have heard
  All vainly, I will speak what she endured
  Ere coming hither, and invoke the past
  To prove my prescience true. And so--to leave
  A multitude of words and pass at once
  To the subject of thy course--when thou hadst gone
  To those Molossian plains which sweep around
  Dodona shouldering Heaven, whereby the fane
  Of Zeus Thesprotian keepeth oracle,
  And, wonder past belief, where oaks do wave
  Articulate adjurations--(ay, the same
  Saluted thee in no perplexed phrase
  But clear with glory, noble wife of Zeus
  That shouldst be,--there some sweetness took thy sense!)
  Thou didst rush further onward, stung along
  The ocean-shore, toward Rhea's mighty bay
  And, tost back from it, wast tost to it again
  In stormy evolution:--and, know well,
  In coming time that hollow of the sea
  Shall bear the name Ionian and present
  A monument of Io's passage through
  Unto all mortals. Be these words the signs
  Of my soul's power to look beyond the veil
  Of visible things. The rest, to you and her
  I will declare in common audience, nymphs,
  Returning thither where my speech brake off.
  There is a town Canobus, built upon
  The earth's fair margin at the mouth of Nile
  And on the mound washed up by it; Io, there
  Shall Zeus give back to thee thy perfect mind,
  And only by the pressure and the touch
  Of a hand not terrible; and thou to Zeus
  Shalt bear a dusky son who shall be called
  Thence, Epaphus, _Touched_. That son shall pluck the fruit
  Of all that land wide-watered by the flow
  Of Nile; but after him, when counting out
  As far as the fifth full generation, then
  Full fifty maidens, a fair woman-race,
  Shall back to Argos turn reluctantly,
  To fly the proffered nuptials of their kin,
  Their father's brothers. These being passion struck,
  Like falcons bearing hard on flying doves,
  Shall follow, hunting at a quarry of love
  They should not hunt; till envious Heaven maintain
  A curse betwixt that beauty and their desire,
  And Greece receive them, to be overcome
  In murtherous woman-war, by fierce red hands
  Kept savage by the night. For every wife
  Shall slay a husband, dyeing deep in blood
  The sword of a double edge--(I wish indeed
  As fair a marriage-joy to all my foes!)
  One bride alone shall fail to smite to death
  The head upon her pillow, touched with love,
  Made impotent of purpose and impelled
  To choose the lesser evil,--shame on her cheeks,
  Than blood-guilt on her hands: which bride shall bear
  A royal race in Argos. Tedious speech
  Were needed to relate particulars
  Of these things; 'tis enough that from her seed
  Shall spring the strong He, famous with the bow,
  Whose arm shall break my fetters off. Behold,
  My mother Themis, that old Titaness,
  Delivered to me such an oracle,--
  But how and when, I should be long to speak,
  And thou, in hearing, wouldst not gain at all.

  _Io._ Eleleu, eleleu!
        How the spasm and the pain
        And the fire on the brain
          Strike, burning me through!
  How the sting of the curse, all aflame as it flew,
        Pricks me onward again!
  How my heart in its terror is spurning my breast,
  And my eyes, like the wheels of a chariot, roll round!
  I am whirled from my course, to the east, to the west,
  In the whirlwind of phrensy all madly inwound--
  And my mouth is unbridled for anguish and hate,
  And my words beat in vain, in wild storms of unrest,
        On the sea of my desolate fate.

[_IO rushes out._

  _Chorus.--Strophe._
      Oh, wise was he, oh, wise was he
      Who first within his spirit knew
      And with his tongue declared it true
      That love comes best that comes unto
            The equal of degree!
      And that the poor and that the low
      Should seek no love from those above,
      Whose souls are fluttered with the flow
      Of airs about their golden height,
      Or proud because they see arow
            Ancestral crowns of light.

  _Antistrophe._
      Oh, never, never may ye, Fates,
        Behold me with your awful eyes
        Lift mine too fondly up the skies
      Where Zeus upon the purple waits!
        Nor let me step too near--too near
      To any suitor, bright from heaven:
        Because I see, because I fear
      This loveless maiden vexed and laden
      By this fell curse of Here, driven
        On wanderings dread and drear.

  _Epode._
      Nay, grant an equal troth instead
        Of nuptial love, to bind me by!
      It will not hurt, I shall not dread
        To meet it in reply.
      But let not love from those above
      Revert and fix me, as I said,
        With that inevitable Eye!
      I have no sword to fight that fight,
      I have no strength to tread that path,
      I know not if my nature hath
      The power to bear, I cannot see
      Whither from Zeus's infinite
      I have the power to flee.

  _Prometheus._ Yet Zeus, albeit most absolute of will,
  Shall turn to meekness,--such a marriage-rite
  He holds in preparation, which anon
  Shall thrust him headlong from his gerent seat
  Adown the abysmal void, and so the curse
  His father Chronos muttered in his fall,
  As he fell from his ancient throne and cursed,
  Shall be accomplished wholly. No escape
  From all that ruin shall the filial Zeus
  Find granted to him from any of his gods,
  Unless I teach him. I the refuge know,
  And I, the means. Now, therefore, let him sit
  And brave the imminent doom, and fix his faith
  On his supernal noises, hurtling on
  With restless hand the bolt that breathes out fire;
  For these things shall not help him, none of them,
  Nor hinder his perdition when he falls
  To shame, and lower than patience: such a foe
  He doth himself prepare against himself,
  A wonder of unconquerable hate,
  An organizer of sublimer fire
  Than glares in lightnings, and of grander sound
  Than aught the thunder rolls, out-thundering it,
  With power to shatter in Poseidon's fist
  The trident-spear which, while it plagues the sea,
  Doth shake the shores around it. Ay, and Zeus,
  Precipitated thus, shall learn at length
  The difference betwixt rule and servitude.

  _Chorus._ Thou makest threats for Zeus of thy desires.

  _Prometheus._ I tell you, all these things shall be fulfilled.
  Even so as I desire them.

  _Chorus._                  Must we then
  Look out for one shall come to master Zeus?

  _Prometheus._ These chains weigh lighter than his sorrows shall.

  _Chorus._ How art thou not afraid to utter such words?

  _Prometheus._ What should _I_ fear who cannot die?

  _Chorus._                                            But _he_
  Can visit thee with dreader woe than death's.

  _Prometheus._ Why, let him do it! I am here, prepared
  For all things and their pangs.

  _Chorus._                      The wise are they
  Who reverence Adrasteia.

  _Prometheus._              Reverence thou,
  Adore thou, flatter thou, whomever reigns,
  Whenever reigning! but for me, your Zeus
  Is less than nothing. Let him act and reign
  His brief hour out according to his will--
  He will not, therefore, rule the gods too long.
  But lo! I see that courier-god of Zeus,
  That new-made menial of the new-crowned king:
  He doubtless comes to announce to us something new.

_HERMES enters._

  _Hermes._ I speak to thee, the sophist, the talker-down
  Of scorn by scorn, the sinner against gods,
  The reverencer of men, the thief of fire,--
  I speak to thee and adjure thee! Zeus requires
  Thy declaration of what marriage-rite
  Thus moves thy vaunt and shall hereafter cause
  His fall from empire. Do not wrap thy speech
  In riddles, but speak clearly! Never cast
  Ambiguous paths, Prometheus, for my feet,
  Since Zeus, thou mayst perceive, is scarcely won
  To mercy by such means.

  _Prometheus._               A speech well-mouthed
  In the utterance, and full-minded in the sense,
  As doth befit a servant of the gods!
  New gods, ye newly reign, and think forsooth
  Ye dwell in towers too high for any dart
  To carry a wound there!--have I not stood by
  While two kings fell from thence? and shall I not
  Behold the third, the same who rules you now,
  Fall, shamed to sudden ruin?--Do I seem
  To tremble and quail before your modern gods?
  Far be it from me!--For thyself, depart,
  Re-tread thy steps in haste. To all thou hast asked
  I answer nothing.

  _Hermes._           Such a wind of pride
  Impelled thee of yore full-sail upon these rocks.

  _Prometheus._ I would not barter---learn thou soothly that!--
  My suffering for thy service. I maintain
  It is a nobler thing to serve these rocks
  Than live a faithful slave to father Zeus.
  Thus upon scorners I retort their scorn.

  _Hermes._ It seems that thou dost glory in thy despair.

  _Prometheus._ I glory? would my foes did glory so,
  And I stood by to see them!--naming whom,
  Thou art not unremembered.

  _Hermes._                     Dost thou charge
  Me also with the blame of thy mischance?

  _Prometheus._ I tell thee I loathe the universal gods,
  Who for the good I gave them rendered back
  The ill of their injustice.

  _Hermes._                  Thou art mad--
  Thou art raving, Titan, at the fever-height.

  _Prometheus._ If it be madness to abhor my foes,
  May I be mad!

  _Hermes._       If thou wert prosperous
  Thou wouldst be unendurable.

  _Prometheus._                      Alas!

  _Hermes._ Zeus knows not that word.

  _Prometheus._                      But maturing Time
  Teaches all things.

  _Hermes._        Howbeit, thou hast not learnt
  The wisdom yet, thou needest.

  _Prometheus._                    If I had,
  I should not talk thus with a slave like thee.

  _Hermes._ No answer thou vouchsafest, I believe,
  To the great Sire's requirement.

  _Prometheus._                   Verily
  I owe him grateful service,--and should pay it.

  _Hermes._ Why, thou dost mock me, Titan, as I stood
  A child before thy face.

  _Prometheus._            No child, forsooth,
  But yet more foolish than a foolish child,
  If thou expect that I should answer aught
  Thy Zeus can ask. No torture from his hand
  Nor any machination in the world
  Shall force mine utterance ere he loose, himself,
  These cankerous fetters from me. For the rest,
  Let him now hurl his blanching lightnings down,
  And with his white-winged snows and mutterings deep
  Of subterranean thunders mix all things,
  Confound them in disorder. None of this
  Shall bend my sturdy will and make me speak
  The name of his dethroner who shall come.

  _Hermes._ Can this avail thee? Look to it!

  _Prometheus._                             Long ago
  It was looked forward to, precounselled of.

  _Hermes._ Vain god, take righteous courage! dare for once
  To apprehend and front thine agonies
  With a just prudence.

  _Prometheus._          Vainly dost thou chafe
  My soul with exhortation, as yonder sea
  Goes beating on the rock. Oh, think no more
  That I, fear-struck by Zeus to a woman's mind,
  Will supplicate him, loathed as he is,
  With feminine upliftings of my hands,
  To break these chains. Far from me be the thought!

  _Hermes._ I have indeed, methinks, said much in vain,
  For still thy heart beneath my showers of prayers
  Lies dry and hard--nay, leaps like a young horse
  Who bites against the new bit in his teeth,
  And tugs and struggles against the new-tried rein,--
  Still fiercest in the feeblest thing of all,
  Which sophism is; since absolute will disjoined
  From perfect mind is worse than weak. Behold,
  Unless my words persuade thee, what a blast
  And whirlwind of inevitable woe
  Must sweep persuasion through thee! For at first
  The Father will split up this jut of rock
  With the great thunder and the bolted flame
  And hide thy body where a hinge of stone
  Shall catch it like an arm; and when thou hast passed
  A long black time within, thou shalt come out
  To front the sun while Zeus's winged hound,
  The strong carnivorous eagle, shall wheel down
  To meet thee, self-called to a daily feast,
  And set his fierce beak in thee and tear off
  The long rags of thy flesh and batten deep
  Upon thy dusky liver. Do not look
  For any end moreover to this curse
  Or ere some god appear, to accept thy pangs
  On his own head vicarious, and descend
  With unreluctant step the darks of hell
  And gloomy abysses around Tartarus.
  Then ponder this--this threat is not a growth
  Of vain invention; it is spoken and meant;
  King Zeus's mouth is impotent to lie,
  Consummating the utterance by the act;
  So, look to it, thou! take heed, and nevermore
  Forget good counsel, to indulge self-will.

  _Chorus._ Our Hermes suits his reasons to the times;
  At least I think so, since he bids thee drop
  Self-will for prudent counsel. Yield to him!
  When the wise err, their wisdom makes their shame.

  _Prometheus._ Unto me the foreknower, this mandate of power
            He cries, to reveal it.
  What's strange in my fate, if I suffer from hate
            At the hour that I feel it?
  Let the locks of the lightning, all bristling and whitening,
            Flash, coiling me round,
  While the aether goes surging 'neath thunder and scourging
            Of wild winds unbound!
  Let the blast of the firmament whirl from its place
            The earth rooted below,
  And the brine of the ocean, in rapid emotion,
            Be driven in the face
  Of the stars up in heaven, as they walk to and fro!
  Let him hurl me anon into Tartarus--on--
            To the blackest degree,
  With Necessity's vortices strangling me down;
  But he cannot join death to a fate meant for _me_!

  _Hermes._ Why, the words that he speaks and the thoughts that he thinks
            Are maniacal!--add,
  If the Fate who hath bound him should loose not the links,
            He were utterly mad.
        Then depart ye who groan with him,
        Leaving to moan with him,--
  Go in haste! lest the roar of the thunder anearing
  Should blast you to idiocy, living and hearing.

  _Chorus._ Change thy speech for another, thy thought for a new,
    If to move me and teach me indeed be thy care!
  For thy words swerve so far from the loyal and true
    That the thunder of Zeus seems more easy to bear.
  How! couldst teach me to venture such vileness? behold!
    I _choose_, with this victim, this anguish foretold!
  I recoil from the traitor in hate and disdain,
  And I know that the curse of the treason is worse
          Than the pang of the chain.

  _Hermes._ Then remember, O nymphs, what I tell you before,
    Nor, when pierced by the arrows that Ate will throw you,
  Cast blame on your fate and declare evermore
    That Zeus thrust you on anguish he did not foreshow you.
  Nay, verily, nay! for ye perish anon
    For your deed--by your choice. By no blindness of doubt,
  No abruptness of doom, but by madness alone,
    In the great net of Ate, whence none cometh out,
           Ye are wound and undone.

  _Prometheus._ Ay! in act now, in word now no more,
         Earth is rocking in space.
  And the thunders crash up with a roar upon roar,
    And the eddying lightnings flash fire in my face,
  And the whirlwinds are whirling the dust round and round,
    And the blasts of the winds universal leap free
  And blow each upon each with a passion of sound,
    And aether goes mingling in storm with the sea.
  Such a curse on my head, in a manifest dread,
    From the hand of your Zeus has been hurtled along.
  O my mother's fair glory! O AEther, enringing
  All eyes with the sweet common light of thy bringing!
          Dost see how I suffer this wrong?




A LAMENT FOR ADONIS


FROM THE GREEK OF BION


  I.

  I mourn for Adonis--Adonis is dead,
    Fair Adonis is dead and the Loves are lamenting.
  Sleep, Cypris, no more on thy purple-strewed bed:
    Arise, wretch stoled in black; beat thy breast unrelenting,
  And shriek to the worlds, "Fair Adonis is dead!"


  II.

  I mourn for Adonis--the Loves are lamenting.
    He lies on the hills in his beauty and death;
  The white tusk of a boar has transpierced his white thigh.
    Cytherea grows mad at his thin gasping breath,
  While the black blood drips down on the pale ivory,
    And his eyeballs lie quenched with the weight of his brows,
  The rose fades from his lips, and upon them just parted
    The kiss dies the goddess consents not to lose,
  Though the kiss of the Dead cannot make her glad-hearted:
    He knows not who kisses him dead in the dews.


  III.

  I mourn for Adonis--the Loves are lamenting.
    Deep, deep in the thigh is Adonis's wound,
  But a deeper, is Cypris's bosom presenting.
    The youth lieth dead while his dogs howl around,
  And the nymphs weep aloud from the mists of the hill,
    And the poor Aphrodite, with tresses unbound,
  All dishevelled, unsandaled, shrieks mournful and shrill
    Through the dusk of the groves. The thorns, tearing her feet,
  Gather up the red flower of her blood which is holy,
    Each footstep she takes; and the valleys repeat
  The sharp cry she utters and draw it out slowly.
    She calls on her spouse, her Assyrian, on him
  Her own youth, while the dark blood spreads over his body,
    The chest taking hue from the gash in the limb,
  And the bosom, once ivory, turning to ruddy.


  IV.

  Ah, ah, Cytherea! the Loves are lamenting.
    She lost her fair spouse and so lost her fair smile:
  When he lived she was fair, by the whole world's consenting,
    Whose fairness is dead with him: woe worth the while!
  All the mountains above and the oaklands below
    Murmur, ah, ah, Adonis! the streams overflow
  Aphrodite's deep wail; river-fountains in pity
    Weep soft in the hills, and the flowers as they blow
  Redden outward with sorrow, while all hear her go
    With the song of her sadness through mountain and city.


  V.

  Ah, ah, Cytherea! Adonis is dead,
    Fair Adonis is dead--Echo answers, Adonis:
  Who weeps not for Cypris, when bowing her head
    She stares at the wound where it gapes and astonies?
  --When, ah, ah!--she saw how the blood ran away
    And empurpled the thigh, and, with wild hands flung out,
  Said with sobs: "Stay, Adonis! unhappy one, stay,
    Let me feel thee once more, let me ring thee about
  With the clasp of my arms, and press kiss into kiss!
    Wait a little, Adonis, and kiss me again,
  For the last time, beloved,--and but so much of this
    That the kiss may learn life from the warmth of the strain!
  --Till thy breath shall exude from thy soul to my mouth,
    To my heart, and, the love-charm I once more receiving
  May drink thy love in it and keep of a truth
    That one kiss in the place of Adonis the living.
  Thou fliest me, mournful one, fliest me far,
    My Adonis, and seekest the Acheron portal,--
  To Hell's cruel King goest down with a scar,
    While I weep and live on like a wretched immortal,
  And follow no step! O Persephone, take him,
    My husband!--thou'rt better and brighter than I,
  So all beauty flows down to thee: _I_ cannot make him
    Look up at my grief; there's despair in my cry,
  Since I wail for Adonis who died to me--died to me--
    Then, I fear _thee_!--Art thou dead, my Adored?
  Passion ends like a dream in the sleep that's denied to me,
    Cypris is widowed, the Loves seek their lord
  All the house through in vain. Charm of cestus has ceased
    With thy clasp! O too bold in the hunt past preventing,
  Ay, mad, thou so fair, to have strife with a beast!"
    Thus the goddess wailed on--and the Loves are lamenting.


  VI.

  Ah, ah, Cytherea! Adonis is dead.
  She wept tear after tear with the blood which was shed,
  And both turned into flowers for the earth's garden-close,
  Her tears, to the windflower; his blood, to the rose.


  VII.

  I mourn for Adonis--Adonis is dead.
    Weep no more in the woods, Cytherea, thy lover!
  So, well: make a place for his corse in thy bed,
    With the purples thou sleepest in, under and over
  He's fair though a corse--a fair corse, like a sleeper.
    Lay him soft in the silks he had pleasure to fold
  When, beside thee at night, holy dreams deep and deeper
    Enclosed his young life on the couch made of gold.
  Love him still, poor Adonis; cast on him together
    The crowns and the flowers: since he died from the place,
  Why, let all die with him; let the blossoms go wither,
    Rain myrtles and olive-buds down on his face.
  Rain the myrrh down, let all that is best fall a-pining,
    Since the myrrh of his life from thy keeping is swept.
  Pale he lay, thine Adonis, in purples reclining,
    The Loves raised their voices around him and wept.
  They have shorn their bright curls off to cast on Adonis;
  One treads on his bow,--on his arrows, another,--
  One breaks up a well-feathered quiver, and one is
    Bent low at a sandal, untying the strings,
    And one carries the vases of gold from the springs,
  While one washes the wound,--and behind them a brother
    Fans down on the body sweet air with his wings.


  VIII.

  Cytherea herself now the Loves are lamenting
    Each torch at the door Hymenaeus blew out;
  And, the marriage-wreath dropping its leaves as repenting,
    No more "Hymen, Hymen," is chanted about,
  But the _ai ai_ instead--"Ai alas!" is begun
    For Adonis, and then follows "Ai Hymenaeus!"
  The Graces are weeping for Cinyris' son,
    Sobbing low each to each, "His fair eyes cannot see us!"
  Their wail strikes more shrill than the sadder Dione's.
  The Fates mourn aloud for Adonis, Adonis,
  Deep chanting; he hears not a word that they say:
    He _would_ hear, but Persephone has him in keeping.
  --Cease moan, Cytherea! leave pomps for to-day,
    And weep new when a new year refits thee for weeping.




A VISION OF POETS


    O Sacred Essence, lighting me this hour,
    How may I lightly stile thy great power?
  _Echo._                              Power.
    Power! but of whence? under the greenwood spraye?
    Or liv'st in Heaven? saye.
  _Echo._                      In Heavens aye.
    In Heavens aye! tell, may I it obtayne
    By alms, by fasting, prayer,--by paine?
  _Echo._                            By paine
    Show me the paine, it shall be undergone.
    I to mine end will still go on.
  _Echo._                           Go on.

                                          _Britannia's Pastorals._




A VISION OF POETS.


  A poet could not sleep aright,
  For his soul kept up too much light
  Under his eyelids for the night.

  And thus he rose disquieted
  With sweet rhymes ringing through his head,
  And in the forest wandered

  Where, sloping up the darkest glades,
  The moon had drawn long colonnades
  Upon whose floor the verdure fades

  To a faint silver: pavement fair,
  The antique wood-nymphs scarce would dare
  To foot-print o'er, had such been there,

  And rather sit by breathlessly,
  With fear in their large eyes, to see
  The consecrated sight. But HE--

  The poet who, with spirit-kiss
  Familiar, had long claimed for his
  Whatever earthly beauty is,

  Who also in his spirit bore
  A beauty passing the earth's store,--
  Walked calmly onward evermore.

  His aimless thoughts in metre went,
  Like a babe's hand without intent
  Drawn down a seven-stringed instrument:

  Nor jarred it with his humour as,
  With a faint stirring of the grass,
  An apparition fair did pass.

  He might have feared another time,
  But all things fair and strange did chime
  With his thoughts then, as rhyme to rhyme.

  An angel had not startled him,
  Alighted from heaven's burning rim
  To breathe from glory in the Dim;

  Much less a lady riding slow
  Upon a palfrey white as snow,
  And smooth as a snow-cloud could go.

  Full upon his she turned her face,
  "What ho, sir poet! dost thou pace
  Our woods at night in ghostly chase

  "Of some fair Dryad of old tales
  Who chants between the nightingales
  And over sleep by song prevails?"

  She smiled; but he could see arise
  Her soul from far adown her eyes,
  Prepared as if for sacrifice.

  She looked a queen who seemeth gay
  From royal grace alone. "Now, nay,"
  He answered, "slumber passed away,

  "Compelled by instincts in my head
  That I should see to-night, instead
  Of a fair nymph, some fairer Dread."

  She looked up quickly to the sky
  And spake: "The moon's regality
  Will hear no praise; She is as I.

  "She is in heaven, and I on earth;
  This is my kingdom: I come forth
  To crown all poets to their worth."

  He brake in with a voice that mourned;
  "To their worth, lady? They are scorned
  By men they sing for, till inurned.

  "To their worth? Beauty in the mind
  Leaves the hearth cold, and love-refined
  Ambitions make the world unkind.

  "The boor who ploughs the daisy down,
  The chief whose mortgage of renown,
  Fixed upon graves, has bought a crown--

  "Both these are happier, more approved
  Than poets!--why should I be moved
  In saying, both are more beloved?"

  "The south can judge not of the north,"
  She resumed calmly; "I come forth
  To crown all poets to their worth.

  "Yea, verily, to anoint them all
  With blessed oils which surely shall
  Smell sweeter as the ages fall."

  "As sweet," the poet said, and rung
  A low sad laugh, "as flowers are, sprung
  Out of their graves when they die young;

  "As sweet as window-eglantine,
  Some bough of which, as they decline,
  The hired nurse gathers at their sign:

  "As sweet, in short, as perfumed shroud
  Which the gay Roman maidens sewed
  For English Keats, singing aloud."

  The lady answered, "Yea, as sweet!
  The things thou namest being complete
  In fragrance, as I measure it.

  "Since sweet the death-clothes and the knell
  Of him who having lived, dies well;
  And wholly sweet the asphodel

  "Stirred softly by that foot of his,
  When he treads brave on all that is,
  Into the world of souls, from this.

  "Since sweet the tears, dropped at the door
  Of tearless Death, and even before:
  Sweet, consecrated evermore.

  "What, dost thou judge it a strange thing
  That poets, crowned for vanquishing,
  Should bear some dust from out the ring?

  "Come on with me, come on with me,
  And learn in coming: let me free
  Thy spirit into verity."

  She ceased: her palfrey's paces sent
  No separate noises as she went;
  'Twas a bee's hum, a little spent.

  And while the poet seemed to tread
  Along the drowsy noise so made,
  The forest heaved up overhead

  Its billowy foliage through the air,
  And the calm stars did far and spare
  O'erswim the masses everywhere

  Save when the overtopping pines
  Did bar their tremulous light with lines
  All fixed and black. Now the moon shines

  A broader glory. You may see
  The trees grow rarer presently;
  The air blows up more fresh and free:

  Until they come from dark to light,
  And from the forest to the sight
  Of the large heaven-heart, bare with night,

  A fiery throb in every star,
  Those burning arteries that are
  The conduits of God's life afar,--

  A wild brown moorland underneath,
  And four pools breaking up the heath
  With white low gleamings, blank as death.

  Beside the first pool, near the wood,
  A dead tree in set horror stood,
  Peeled and disjointed, stark as rood;

  Since thunder-stricken, years ago,
  Fixed in the spectral strain and throe
  Wherewith it struggled from the blow:

  A monumental tree, alone,
  That will not bend in storms, nor groan,
  But break off sudden like a stone.

  Its lifeless shadow lies oblique
  Upon the pool where, javelin-like,
  The star-rays quiver while they strike.

  "Drink," said the lady, very still--
  "Be holy and cold." He did her will
  And drank the starry water chill.

  The next pool they came near unto
  Was bare of trees; there, only grew
  Straight flags, and lilies just a few

  Which sullen on the water sate
  And leant their faces on the flat,
  As weary of the starlight-state.

  "Drink," said the lady, grave and slow--
  "_World's use_ behoveth thee to know."
  He drank the bitter wave below.

  The third pool, girt with thorny bushes
  And flaunting weeds and reeds and rushes
  That winds sang through in mournful gushes,

  Was whitely smeared in many a round
  By a slow slime; the starlight swound
  Over the ghastly light it found.

  "Drink," said the lady, sad and slow--
  "_World's love_ behoveth thee to know."
  He looked to her commanding so;

  Her brow was troubled, but her eye
  Struck clear to his soul. For all reply
  He drank the water suddenly,--

  Then, with a deathly sickness, passed
  Beside the fourth pool and the last,
  Where weights of shadow were downcast

  From yew and alder and rank trails
  Of nightshade clasping the trunk-scales
  And flung across the intervals

  From yew to yew: who dares to stoop
  Where those dank branches overdroop,
  Into his heart the chill strikes up,

  He hears a silent gliding coil,
  The snakes strain hard against the soil,
  His foot slips in their slimy oil,

  And toads seem crawling on his hand,
  And clinging bats but dimly scanned
  Full in his face their wings expand.

  A paleness took the poet's cheek:
  "Must I drink _here_?" he seemed to seek
  The lady's will with utterance meek:

  "Ay, ay," she said, "it so must be;"
  (And this time she spake cheerfully)
  "Behoves thee know _World's cruelty_."

  He bowed his forehead till his mouth
  Curved in the wave, and drank unloth
  As if from rivers of the south;

  His lips sobbed through the water rank,
  His heart paused in him while he drank,
  His brain beat heart-like, rose and sank,

  And he swooned backward to a dream
  Wherein he lay 'twixt gloom and gleam,
  With Death and Life at each extreme:

  And spiritual thunders, born of soul
  Not cloud, did leap from mystic pole
  And o'er him roll and counter-roll,

  Crushing their echoes reboant
  With their own wheels. Did Heaven so grant
  His spirit a sign of covenant?

  At last came silence. A slow kiss
  Did crown his forehead after this;
  His eyelids flew back for the bliss--

  The lady stood beside his head,
  Smiling a thought, with hair dispread;
  The moonshine seemed dishevelled

  In her sleek tresses manifold
  Like Danae's in the rain of old
  That dripped with melancholy gold:

  But SHE was holy, pale and high
  As one who saw an ecstasy
  Beyond a foretold agony.

  "Rise up!" said she with voice where song
  Eddied through speech, "rise up; be strong:
  And learn how right avenges wrong."

  The poet rose up on his feet:
  He stood before an altar set
  For sacrament with vessels meet

  And mystic altar-lights which shine
  As if their flames were crystalline
  Carved flames that would not shrink or pine.

  The altar filled the central place
  Of a great church, and toward its face
  Long aisles did shoot and interlace,

  And from it a continuous mist
  Of incense (round the edges kissed
  By a yellow light of amethyst)

  Wound upward slowly and throbbingly,
  Cloud within cloud, right silverly,
  Cloud above cloud, victoriously,--

  Broke full against the arched roof
  And thence refracting eddied off
  And floated through the marble woof

  Of many a fine-wrought architrave,
  Then, poising its white masses brave,
  Swept solemnly down aisle and nave

  Where, now in dark and now in light,
  The countless columns, glimmering white,
  Seemed leading out to the Infinite:

  Plunged halfway up the shaft, they showed
  In that pale shifting incense-cloud
  Which flowed them by and overflowed

  Till mist and marble seemed to blend
  And the whole temple, at the end,
  With its own incense to distend,--

  The arches like a giant's bow
  To bend and slacken,--and below,
  The niched saints to come and go:

  Alone amid the shifting scene
  That central altar stood serene
  In its clear steadfast taper-sheen.

  Then first, the poet was aware
  Of a chief angel standing there
  Before that altar, in the glare.

  His eyes were dreadful, for you saw
  That _they_ saw God; his lips and jaw
  Grand-made and strong, as Sinai's law

  They could enunciate and refrain
  From vibratory after-pain,
  And his brow's height was sovereign:

  On the vast background of his wings
  Rises his image, and he flings
  From each plumed arc pale glitterings

  And fiery flakes (as beateth, more
  Or less, the angel-heart) before
  And round him upon roof and floor,

  Edging with fire the shifting fumes,
  While at his side 'twixt lights and glooms
  The phantasm of an organ booms.

  Extending from which instrument
  And angel, right and left-way bent,
  The poet's sight grew sentient

  Of a strange company around
  And toward the altar, pale and bound
  With bay above the eyes profound.

  Deathful their faces were, and yet
  The power of life was in them set--
  Never forgot nor to forget:

  Sublime significance of mouth,
  Dilated nostril full of youth,
  And forehead royal with the truth.

  These faces were not multiplied
  Beyond your count, but side by side
  Did front the altar, glorified,

  Still as a vision, yet exprest
  Full as an action--look and geste
  Of buried saint in risen rest.

  The poet knew them. Faint and dim
  His spirits seemed to sink in him--
  Then, like a dolphin, change and swim

  The current: these were poets true,
  Who died for Beauty as martyrs do
  For Truth--the ends being scarcely two.

  God's prophets of the Beautiful
  These poets were; of iron rule,
  The rugged cilix, serge of wool.

  Here Homer, with the broad suspense
  Of thunderous brows, and lips intense
  Of garrulous god-innocence.

  There Shakespeare, on whose forehead climb
  The crowns o' the world: O eyes sublime
  With tears and laughters for all time!

  Here AEschylus, the women swooned
  To see so awful when he frowned
  As the gods did: he standeth crowned.

  Euripides, with close and mild
  Scholastic lips, that could be wild
  And laugh or sob out like a child

  Even in the classes. Sophocles,
  With that king's-look which down the trees
  Followed the dark effigies

  Of the lost Theban. Hesiod old,
  Who, somewhat blind and deaf and cold,
  Cared most for gods and bulls. And bold

  Electric Pindar, quick as fear,
  With race-dust on his cheeks, and clear
  Slant startled eyes that seem to hear

  The chariot rounding the last goal,
  To hurtle past it in his soul.
  And Sappho, with that gloriole

  Of ebon hair on calmed brows--
  O poet-woman! none forgoes
  The leap, attaining the repose.

  Theocritus, with glittering locks
  Dropt sideway, as betwixt the rocks
  He watched the visionary flocks.

  And Aristophanes, who took
  The world with mirth, and laughter-struck
  The hollow caves of Thought and woke

  The infinite echoes hid in each.
  And Virgil: shade of Mantuan beech
  Did help the shade of bay to reach

  And knit around his forehead high:
  For his gods wore less majesty
  Than his brown bees hummed deathlessly.

  Lucretius, nobler than his mood,
  Who dropped his plummet down the broad
  Deep universe and said "No God--"

  Finding no bottom: he denied
  Divinely the divine, and died
  Chief poet on the Tiber-side

  By grace of God: his face is stern
  As one compelled, in spite of scorn,
  To teach a truth he would not learn.

  And Ossian, dimly seen or guessed;
  Once counted greater than the rest,
  When mountain-winds blew out his vest.

  And Spenser drooped his dreaming head
  (With languid sleep-smile you had said
  From his own verse engendered)

  On Ariosto's, till they ran
  Their curls in one: the Italian
  Shot nimbler heat of bolder man

  From his fine lids. And Dante stern
  And sweet, whose spirit was an urn
  For wine and milk poured out in turn.

  Hard-souled Alfieri; and fancy-willed
  Boiardo, who with laughter filled
  The pauses of the jostled shield.

  And Berni, with a hand stretched out
  To sleek that storm. And, not without
  The wreath he died in and the doubt

  He died by, Tasso, bard and lover,
  Whose visions were too thin to cover
  The face of a false woman over.

  And soft Racine; and grave Corneille,
  The orator of rhymes, whose wail
  Scarce shook his purple. And Petrarch pale,

  From whose brain-lighted heart were thrown
  A thousand thoughts beneath the sun,
  Each lucid with the name of One.

  And Camoens, with that look he had,
  Compelling India's Genius sad
  From the wave through the Lusiad,--

  The murmurs of the storm-cape ocean
  Indrawn in vibrative emotion
  Along the verse. And, while devotion

  In his wild eyes fantastic shone
  Under the tonsure blown upon
  By airs celestial, Calderon.

  And bold De Vega, who breathed quick
  Verse after verse, till death's old trick
  Put pause to life and rhetoric.

  And Goethe, with that reaching eye
  His soul reached out from, far and high,
  And fell from inner entity.

  And Schiller, with heroic front
  Worthy of Plutarch's kiss upon 't,
  Too large for wreath of modern wont.

  And Chaucer, with his infantine
  Familiar clasp of things divine;
  That mark upon his lip is wine.

  Here, Milton's eyes strike piercing-dim:
  The shapes of suns and stars did swim
  Like clouds from them, and granted him

  God for sole vision. Cowley, there,
  Whose active fancy debonair
  Drew straws like amber--foul to fair.

  Drayton and Browne, with smiles they drew
  From outward nature, still kept new
  From their own inward nature true.

  And Marlowe, Webster, Fletcher, Ben,
  Whose fire-hearts sowed our furrows when
  The world was worthy of such men.

  And Burns, with pungent passionings
  Set in his eyes: deep lyric springs
  Are of the fire-mount's issuings.

  And Shelley, in his white ideal,
  All statue-blind. And Keats the real
  Adonis with the hymeneal

  Fresh vernal buds half sunk between
  His youthful curls, kissed straight and sheen
  In his Rome-grave, by Venus queen.

  And poor, proud Byron, sad as grave
  And salt as life; forlornly brave,
  And quivering with the dart he drave.

  And visionary Coleridge, who
  Did sweep his thoughts as angels do
  Their wings with cadence up the Blue.

  These poets faced (and many more)
  The lighted altar looming o'er
  The clouds of incense dim and hoar:

  And all their faces, in the lull
  Of natural things, looked wonderful
  With life and death and deathless rule.

  All, still as stone and yet intense;
  As if by spirit's vehemence
  That stone were carved and not by sense.

  But where the heart of each should beat,
  There seemed a wound instead of it,
  From whence the blood dropped to their feet

  Drop after drop--dropped heavily
  As century follows century
  Into the deep eternity.

  Then said the lady--and her word
  Came distant, as wide waves were stirred
  Between her and the ear that heard,--

  "_World's use_ is cold, _world's love_ is vain,
  _World's cruelty_ is bitter bane,
  But pain is not the fruit of pain.

  "Hearken, O poet, whom I led
  From the dark wood: dismissing dread,
  Now hear this angel in my stead.

  "His organ's clavier strikes along
  These poets' hearts, sonorous, strong,
  They gave him without count of wrong,--

  "A diapason whence to guide
  Up to God's feet, from these who died,
  An anthem fully glorified--

  "Whereat God's blessing, IBARAK (=yivarech=)
  Breathes back this music, folds it back
  About the earth in vapoury rack,

  "And men walk in it, crying 'Lo
  The world is wider, and we know
  The very heavens look brighter so:

  "'The stars move statelier round the edge
  Of the silver spheres, and give in pledge
  Their light for nobler privilege:

  "'No little flower but joys or grieves,
  Full life is rustling in the sheaves,
  Full spirit sweeps the forest-leaves.'

  "So works this music on the earth,
  God so admits it, sends it forth
  To add another worth to worth--

  "A new creation-bloom that rounds
  The old creation and expounds
  His Beautiful in tuneful sounds.

  "Now hearken!" Then the poet gazed
  Upon the angel glorious-faced
  Whose hand, majestically raised,

  Floated across the organ-keys,
  Like a pale moon o'er murmuring seas,
  With no touch but with influences:

  Then rose and fell (with swell and swound
  Of shapeless noises wandering round
  A concord which at last they found)

  Those mystic keys: the tones were mixed,
  Dim, faint, and thrilled and throbbed betwixt
  The incomplete and the unfixed:

  And therein mighty minds were heard
  In mighty musings, inly stirred,
  And struggling outward for a word:

  Until these surges, having run
  This way and that, gave out as one
  An Aphrodite of sweet tune,

  A Harmony that, finding vent,
  Upward in grand ascension went,
  Winged to a heavenly argument,

  Up, upward like a saint who strips
  The shroud back from his eyes and lips,
  And rises in apocalypse:

  A harmony sublime and plain,
  Which cleft (as flying swan, the rain,--
  Throwing the drops off with a strain

  Of her white wing) those undertones
  Of perplext chords, and soared at once
  And struck out from the starry thrones

  Their several silver octaves as
  It passed to God. The music was
  Of divine stature; strong to pass:

  And those who heard it, understood
  Something of life in spirit and blood,
  Something of nature's fair and good:

  And while it sounded, those great souls
  Did thrill as racers at the goals
  And burn in all their aureoles;

  But she the lady, as vapour-bound,
  Stood calmly in the joy of sound,
  Like Nature with the showers around:

  And when it ceased, the blood which fell
  Again, alone grew audible,
  Tolling the silence as a bell.

  The sovran angel lifted high
  His hand, and spake out sovranly:
  "Tried poets, hearken and reply!

  "Give me true answers. If we grant
  That not to suffer, is to want
  The conscience of the jubilant,--

  "If ignorance of anguish is
  _But_ ignorance, and mortals miss
  Far prospects, by a level bliss,--

  "If, as two colours must be viewed
  In a visible image, mortals should
  Need good and evil, to see good,--

  "If to speak nobly, comprehends
  To feel profoundly,--if the ends
  Of power and suffering, Nature blends,--

  "If poets on the tripod must
  Writhe like the Pythian to make just
  Their oracles and merit trust,--

  "If every vatic word that sweeps
  To change the world must pale their lips
  And leave their own souls in eclipse,--

  "If to search deep the universe
  Must pierce the searcher with the curse,
  Because that bolt (in man's reverse)

  "Was shot to the heart o' the wood and lies
  Wedged deepest in the best,--if eyes
  That look for visions and surprise

  "From influent angels, must shut down
  Their eyelids first to sun and moon,
  The head asleep upon a stone,--

  "If ONE who did redeem you back,
  By His own loss, from final wrack,
  Did consecrate by touch and track

  "Those temporal sorrows till the taste
  Of brackish waters of the waste
  Is salt with tears He dropt too fast,--

  "If all the crowns of earth must wound
  With prickings of the thorns He found,--
  If saddest sighs swell sweetest sound,--

  "What say ye unto this?--refuse
  This baptism in salt water?--choose
  Calm breasts, mute lips, and labour loose?

  "Or, O ye gifted givers! ye
  Who give your liberal hearts to me
  To make the world this harmony,

  "Are ye resigned that they be spent
  To such world's help?"
                          The Spirits bent
  Their awful brows and said "Content."

  Content! it sounded like _Amen_
  Said by a choir of mourning men;
  An affirmation full of pain

  And patience,--ay, of glorying
  And adoration, as a king
  Might seal an oath for governing.

  Then said the angel--and his face
  Lightened abroad until the place
  Grew larger for a moment's space,--

  The long aisles flashing out in light,
  And nave and transept, columns white
  And arches crossed, being clear to sight

  As if the roof were off and all
  Stood in the noon-sun,--"Lo, I call
  To other hearts as liberal.

  "This pedal strikes out in the air:
  My instrument has room to bear
  Still fuller strains and perfecter.

  "Herein is room, and shall be room
  While Time lasts, for new hearts to come
  Consummating while they consume.

  "What living man will bring a gift
  Of his own heart and help to lift
  The tune?--The race is to the swift."

  So asked the angel. Straight the while,
  A company came up the aisle
  With measured step and sorted smile;

  Cleaving the incense-clouds that rise,
  With winking unaccustomed eyes
  And love-locks smelling sweet of spice.

  One bore his head above the rest
  As if the world were dispossessed,
  And one did pillow chin on breast,

  Right languid, an as he should faint;
  One shook his curls across his paint
  And moralized on worldly taint;

  One, slanting up his face, did wink
  The salt rheum to the eyelid's brink,
  To think--O gods! or--not to think.

  Some trod out stealthily and slow,
  As if the sun would fall in snow
  If they walked to instead of fro;

  And some, with conscious ambling free,
  Did shake their bells right daintily
  On hand and foot, for harmony;

  And some, composing sudden sighs
  In attitudes of point-device,
  Rehearsed impromptu agonies.

  And when this company drew near
  The spirits crowned, it might appear
  Submitted to a ghastly fear;

  As a sane eye in master-passion
  Constrains a maniac to the fashion
  Of hideous maniac imitation

  In the least geste--the dropping low
  O' the lid, the wrinkling of the brow,
  Exaggerate with mock and mow,--

  So mastered was that company
  By the crowned vision utterly,
  Swayed to a maniac mockery.

  One dulled his eyeballs, as they ached
  With Homer's forehead, though he lacked
  An inch of any; and one racked

  His lower lip with restless tooth,
  As Pindar's rushing words forsooth
  Were pent behind it; one his smooth

  Pink cheeks did rumple passionate
  Like AEschylus, and tried to prate
  On trolling tongue of fate and fate;

  One set her eyes like Sappho's--or
  Any light woman's; one forbore
  Like Dante, or any man as poor

  In mirth, to let a smile undo
  His hard-shut lips; and one that drew
  Sour humours from his mother, blew

  His sunken cheeks out to the size
  Of most unnatural jollities,
  Because Anacreon looked jest-wise;

  So with the rest: it was a sight
  A great world-laughter would requite,
  Or great world-wrath, with equal right

  Out came a speaker from that crowd
  To speak for all, in sleek and proud
  Exordial periods, while he bowed

  His knee before the angel--"Thus,
  O angel who hast called for us,
  We bring thee service emulous,

  "Fit service from sufficient soul,
  Hand-service to receive world's dole,
  Lip-service in world's ear to roll

  "Adjusted concords soft enow
  To hear the wine-cups passing, through,
  And not too grave to spoil the show:

  "Thou, certes, when thou askest more,
  O sapient angel, leanest o'er
  The window-sill of metaphor.

  "To give our hearts up? fie! that rage
  Barbaric antedates the age;
  It is not done on any stage.

  "Because your scald or gleeman went
  With seven or nine-stringed instrument
  Upon his back,--must ours be bent?

  "We are not pilgrims, by your leave;
  No, nor yet martyrs; if we grieve,
  It is to rhyme to--summer eve:

  "And if we labour, it shall be
  As suiteth best with our degree,
  In after-dinner reverie."

  More yet that speaker would have said,
  Poising between his smiles fair-fed
  Each separate phrase till finished;

  But all the foreheads of those born
  And dead true poets flashed with scorn
  Betwixt the bay leaves round them worn,

  Ay, jetted such brave fire that they,
  The new-come, shrank and paled away
  Like leaden ashes when the day

  Strikes on the hearth. A spirit-blast,
  A presence known by power, at last
  Took them up mutely: they had passed.

  And he our pilgrim-poet saw
  Only their places, in deep awe,
  What time the angel's smile did draw

  His gazing upward. Smiling on,
  The angel in the angel shone,
  Revealing glory in benison;

  Till, ripened in the light which shut
  The poet in, his spirit mute
  Dropped sudden as a perfect fruit;

  He fell before the angel's feet,
  Saying, "If what is true is sweet,
  In something I may compass it:

  "For, where my worthiness is poor,
  My will stands richly at the door
  To pay shortcomings evermore.

  "Accept me therefore: not for price
  And not for pride my sacrifice
  Is tendered, for my soul is nice

  "And will beat down those dusty seeds
  Of bearded corn if she succeeds
  In soaring while the covey feeds.

  "I soar, I am drawn up like the lark
  To its white cloud--so high my mark,
  Albeit my wing is small and dark.

  "I ask no wages, seek no fame:
  Sew me, for shroud round face and name,
  God's banner of the oriflamme.

  "I only would have leave to loose
  (In tears and blood if so He choose)
  Mine inward music out to use:

  "I only would be spent--in pain
  And loss, perchance, but not in vain--
  Upon the sweetness of that strain;

  "Only project beyond the bound
  Of mine own life, so lost and found,
  My voice, and live on in its sound;

  "Only embrace and be embraced
  By fiery ends, whereby to waste,
  And light God's future with my past."

  The angel's smile grew more divine,
  The mortal speaking; ay, its shine
  Swelled fuller, like a choir-note fine,

  Till the broad glory round his brow
  Did vibrate with the light below;
  But what he said I do not know.

  Nor know I if the man who prayed,
  Rose up accepted, unforbade,
  From the church-floor where he was laid,--

  Nor if a listening life did run
  Through the king-poets, one by one
  Rejoicing in a worthy son:

  My soul, which might have seen, grew blind
  By what it looked on: I can find
  No certain count of things behind.

  I saw alone, dim, white and grand
  As in a dream, the angel's hand
  Stretched forth in gesture of command

  Straight through the haze. And so, as erst,
  A strain more noble than the first
  Mused in the organ, and outburst:

  With giant march from floor to roof
  Rose the full notes, now parted off
  In pauses massively aloof

  Like measured thunders, now rejoined
  In concords of mysterious kind
  Which fused together sense and mind,

  Now flashing sharp on sharp along
  Exultant in a mounting throng,
  Now dying off to a low song

  Fed upon minors, wavelike sounds
  Re-eddying into silver rounds,
  Enlarging liberty with bounds:

  And every rhythm that seemed to close
  Survived in confluent underflows
  Symphonious with the next that rose.

  Thus the whole strain being multiplied
  And greatened, with its glorified
  Wings shot abroad from side to side,

  Waved backward (as a wind might wave
  A Brocken mist and with as brave
  Wild roaring) arch and architrave,

  Aisle, transept, column, marble wall,--
  Then swelling outward, prodigal
  Of aspiration beyond thrall,

  Soared, and drew up with it the whole
  Of this said vision, as a soul
  Is raised by a thought. And as a scroll

  Of bright devices is unrolled
  Still upward with a gradual gold,
  So rose the vision manifold,

  Angel and organ, and the round
  Of spirits, solemnized and crowned;
  While the freed clouds of incense wound

  Ascending, following in their track,
  And glimmering faintly like the rack
  O' the moon in her own light cast back.

  And as that solemn dream withdrew,
  The lady's kiss did fall anew
  Cold on the poet's brow as dew.

  And that same kiss which bound him first
  Beyond the senses, now reversed
  Its own law and most subtly pierced

  His spirit with the sense of things
  Sensual and present. Vanishings
  Of glory with AEolian wings

  Struck him and passed: the lady's face
  Did melt back in the chrysopras
  Of the orient morning sky that was

  Yet clear of lark and there and so
  She melted as a star might do,
  Still smiling as she melted slow:

  Smiling so slow, he seemed to see
  Her smile the last thing, gloriously
  Beyond her, far as memory.

  Then he looked round: he was alone.
  He lay before the breaking sun,
  As Jacob at the Bethel stone.

  And thought's entangled skein being wound,
  He knew the moorland of his swound,
  And the pale pools that smeared the ground;

  The far wood-pines like offing ships;
  The fourth pool's yew anear him drips,
  _World's cruelty_ attaints his lips,

  And still he tastes it, bitter still;
  Through all that glorious possible
  He had the sight of present ill.

  Yet rising calmly up and slowly
  With such a cheer as scorneth folly,
  A mild delightsome melancholy,

  He journeyed homeward through the wood
  And prayed along the solitude
  Betwixt the pines, "O God, my God!"

  The golden morning's open flowings
  Did sway the trees to murmurous bowings,
  In metric chant of blessed poems.

  And passing homeward through the wood,
  He prayed along the solitude,
  "THOU, Poet-God, art great and good!

  "And though we must have, and have had
  Right reason to be earthly sad,
  THOU, Poet-God, art great and glad!"


CONCLUSION.

  Life treads on life, and heart on heart;
  We press too close in church and mart
  To keep a dream or grave apart:

  And I was 'ware of walking down
  That same green forest where had gone
  The poet-pilgrim. One by one

  I traced his footsteps. From the east
  A red and tender radiance pressed
  Through the near trees, until I guessed

  The sun behind shone full and round;
  While up the leafiness profound
  A wind scarce old enough for sound

  Stood ready to blow on me when
  I turned that way, and now and then
  The birds sang and brake off again

  To shake their pretty feathers dry
  Of the dew sliding droppingly
  From the leaf-edges and apply

  Back to their song: 'twixt dew and bird
  So sweet a silence ministered,
  God seemed to use it for a word,

  Yet morning souls did leap and run
  In all things, as the least had won
  A joyous insight of the sun,

  And no one looking round the wood
  Could help confessing as he stood,
  _This Poet-God is glad and good._

  But hark! a distant sound that grows,
  A heaving, sinking of the boughs,
  A rustling murmur, not of those,

  A breezy noise which is not breeze!
  And white-clad children by degrees
  Steal out in troops among the trees,

  Fair little children morning-bright,
  With faces grave yet soft to sight,
  Expressive of restrained delight.

  Some plucked the palm-boughs within reach,
  And others leapt up high to catch
  The upper boughs and shake from each

  A rain of dew till, wetted so,
  The child who held the branch let go
  And it swang backward with a flow

  Of faster drippings. Then I knew
  The children laughed; but the laugh flew
  From its own chirrup as might do

  A frightened song-bird; and a child
  Who seemed the chief said very mild,
  "Hush! keep this morning undefiled."

  His eyes rebuked them from calm spheres,
  His soul upon his brow appears
  In waiting for more holy years.

  I called the child to me, and said,
  "What are your palms for?" "To be spread,"
  He answered, "on a poet dead.

  "The poet died last month, and now
  The world which had been somewhat slow
  In honouring his living brow,

  "Commands the palms; they must be strown
  On his new marble very soon,
  In a procession of the town."

  I sighed and said, "Did he foresee
  Any such honour?" "Verily
  I cannot tell you," answered he.

  "But this I know, I fain would lay
  My own head down, another day,
  As _he_ did,--with the fame away.

  "A lily, a friend's hand had plucked,
  Lay by his death-bed, which he looked
  As deep down as a bee had sucked,

  "Then, turning to the lattice, gazed
  O'er hill and river and upraised
  His eyes illumined and amazed

  "With the world's beauty, up to God,
  Re-offering on their iris broad
  The images of things bestowed

  "By the chief Poet. 'God!' he cried,
  'Be praised for anguish which has tried,
  For beauty which has satisfied:

  "'For this world's presence half within
  And half without me--thought and scene--
  This sense of Being and Having Been.

  "'I thank Thee that my soul hath room
  For Thy grand world: both guests may come--
  Beauty, to soul--Body, to tomb.

  "'I am content to be so weak:
  Put strength into the words I speak,
  And I am strong in what I seek.

  "'I am content to be so bare
  Before the archers, everywhere
  My wounds being stroked by heavenly air.

  "'I laid my soul before Thy feet
  That images of fair and sweet
  Should walk to other men on it.

  "'I am content to feel the step
  Of each pure image: let those keep
  To mandragore who care to sleep.

  "'I am content to touch the brink
  Of the other goblet and I think
  My bitter drink a wholesome drink.

  "'Because my portion was assigned
  Wholesome and bitter, Thou art kind,
  And I am blessed to my mind.

  "'Gifted for giving, I receive
  The maythorn and its scent outgive:
  I grieve not that I once did grieve.

  "'In my large joy of sight and touch
  Beyond what others count for such,
  I am content to suffer much.

  "'_I know_--is all the mourner saith,
  Knowledge by suffering entereth,
  And Life is perfected by Death.'"

  The child spake nobly: strange to hear,
  His infantine soft accents clear
  Charged with high meanings, did appear;

  And fair to see, his form and face
  Winged out with whiteness and pure grace
  From the green darkness of the place.

  Behind his head a palm-tree grew;
  An orient beam which pierced it through
  Transversely on his forehead drew

  The figure of a palm-branch brown
  Traced on its brightness up and down
  In fine fair lines,--a shadow-crown:

  Guido might paint his angels so--
  A little angel, taught to go
  With holy words to saints below--

  Such innocence of action yet
  Significance of object met
  In his whole bearing strong and sweet.

  And all the children, the whole band,
  Did round in rosy reverence stand,
  Each with a palm-bough in his hand.

  "And so he died," I whispered. "Nay,
  Not _so_," the childish voice did say,
  "That poet turned him first to pray

  "In silence, and God heard the rest
  'Twixt the sun's footsteps down the west.
  Then he called one who loved him best,

  "Yea, he called softly through the room
  (His voice was weak yet tender)--'Come,'
  He said, 'come nearer! Let the bloom

  "'Of Life grow over, undenied,
  This bridge of Death, which is not wide--
  I shall be soon at the other side.

  "'Come, kiss me!' So the one in truth
  Who loved him best,--in love, not ruth,
  Bowed down and kissed him mouth to mouth:

  "And in that kiss of love was won
  Life's manumission. All was done:
  The mouth that kissed last, kissed _alone_.

  "But in the former, confluent kiss,
  The same was sealed, I think, by His,
  To words of truth and uprightness."

  The child's voice trembled, his lips shook
  Like a rose leaning o'er a brook,
  Which vibrates though it is not struck.

  "And who," I asked, a little moved
  Yet curious-eyed, "was this that loved
  And kissed him last, as it behoved?"

  "_I_," softly said the child; and then
  "_I_," said he louder, once again:
  "His son, my rank is among men:

  "And now that men exalt his name
  I come to gather palms with them,
  That holy love may hallow fame.

  "He did not die alone, nor should
  His memory live so, 'mid these rude
  World-praisers--a worse solitude.

  "Me, a voice calleth to that tomb
  Where these are strewing branch and bloom
  Saying, 'Come nearer:' and I come.

  "Glory to God!" resumed he,
  And his eyes smiled for victory
  O'er their own tears which I could see

  Fallen on the palm, down cheek and chin--
  "That poet now has entered in
  The place of rest which is not sin.

  "And while he rests, his songs in troops
  Walk up and down our earthly slopes,
  Companioned by diviner hopes."

  "But _thou_," I murmured to engage
  The child's speech farther--"hast an age
  Too tender for this orphanage."

  "Glory to God--to God!" he saith:
  "KNOWLEDGE BY SUFFERING ENTERETH,
  AND LIFE IS PERFECTED BY DEATH."




THE POET'S VOW


                       O be wiser thou,
Instructed that true knowledge leads to love.

                                    WORDSWORTH.




THE POET'S VOW.


PART THE FIRST.

SHOWING WHEREFORE THE VOW WAS MADE.


  I.

  Eve is a twofold mystery;
    The stillness Earth doth keep,
  The motion wherewith human hearts
    Do each to either leap
  As if all souls between the poles
    Felt "Parting comes in sleep."


  II.

  The rowers lift their oars to view
    Each other in the sea;
  The landsmen watch the rocking boats
    In a pleasant company;
  While up the hill go gladlier still
    Dear friends by two and three.


  III.

  The peasant's wife hath looked without
    Her cottage door and smiled,
  For there the peasant drops his spade
    To clasp his youngest child
  Which hath no speech, but its hand can reach
    And stroke his forehead mild.


  IV.

  A poet sate that eventide
    Within his hall alone,
  As silent as its ancient lords
    In the coffined place of stone,
  When the bat hath shrunk from the praying monk,
    And the praying monk is gone.


  V.

  Nor wore the dead a stiller face
    Beneath the cerement's roll:
  His lips refusing out in words
    Their mystic thoughts to dole,
  His steadfast eye burnt inwardly,
    As burning out his soul.


  VI.

  You would not think that brow could e'er
    Ungentle moods express,
  Yet seemed it, in this troubled world,
    Too calm for gentleness,
  When the very star that shines from far
    Shines trembling ne'ertheless.


  VII.

  It lacked, all need, the softening light
    Which other brows supply:
  We should conjoin the scathed trunks
    Of our humanity,
  That each leafless spray entwining may
    Look softer 'gainst the sky.


  VIII.

  None gazed within the poet's face,
    The poet gazed in none;
  He threw a lonely shadow straight
    Before the moon and sun,
  Affronting nature's heaven-dwelling creatures
    With wrong to nature done:


  IX.

  Because this poet daringly,
    --The nature at his heart,
  And that quick tune along his veins
    He could not change by art,--
  Had vowed his blood of brotherhood
    To a stagnant place apart.


  X.

  He did not vow in fear, or wrath,
    Or grief's fantastic whim,
  But, weights and shows of sensual things
    Too closely crossing him,
  On his soul's eyelid the pressure slid
    And made its vision dim.


  XI.

  And darkening in the dark he strove
    'Twixt earth and sea and sky
  To lose in shadow, wave and cloud,
    His brother's haunting cry:
  The winds were welcome as they swept,
  God's five-day work he would accept,
    But let the rest go by.


  XII.

  He cried, "O touching, patient Earth
    That weepest in thy glee,
  Whom God created very good,
    And very mournful, we!
  Thy voice of moan doth reach His throne,
    As Abel's rose from thee.


  XIII.

  "Poor crystal sky with stars astray!
    Mad winds that howling go
  From east to west! perplexed seas
    That stagger from their blow!
  O motion wild! O wave defiled!
    Our curse hath made you so.


  XIV.

  '_We!_ and _our_ curse! do _I_ partake
    The desiccating sin?
  Have _I_ the apple at my lips?
    The money-lust within?
  Do _I_ human stand with the wounding hand,
    To the blasting heart akin?


  XV.

  "Thou solemn pathos of all things
    For solemn joy designed!
  Behold, submissive to your cause,
    A holy wrath I find
  And, for your sake, the bondage break
    That knits me to my kind.


  XVI.

  "Hear me forswear man's sympathies,
    His pleasant yea and no,
  His riot on the piteous earth
   Whereon his thistles grow,
  His changing love--with stars above,
    His pride--with graves below.


  XVII.

  "Hear me forswear his roof by night,
    His bread and salt by day,
  His talkings at the wood-fire hearth,
    His greetings by the way,
  His answering looks, his systemed books,
    All man, for aye and aye.


  XVIII.

  "That so my purged, once human heart,
    From all the human rent,
  May gather strength to pledge and drink
    Your wine of wonderment,
  While you pardon me all blessingly
    The woe mine Adam sent.


  XIX.

  "And I shall feel your unseen looks
    Innumerous, constant, deep
  And soft as haunted Adam once,
    Though sadder, round me creep,--
  As slumbering men have mystic ken
    Of watchers on their sleep.


  XX.

  "And ever, when I lift my brow
    At evening to the sun,
  No voice of woman or of child
    Recording 'Day is done.'
  Your silences shall a love express,
    More deep than such an one."


PART THE SECOND.

SHOWING TO WHOM THE VOW WAS DECLARED.


  I.

  The poet's vow was inly sworn,
    The poet's vow was told.
  He shared among his crowding friends
    The silver and the gold,
  They clasping bland his gift,--his hand
    In a somewhat slacker hold.


  II.

  They wended forth, the crowding friends,
    With farewells smooth and kind.
  They wended forth, the solaced friends,
    And left but twain behind:
  One loved him true as brothers do,
    And one was Rosalind.


  III.

  He said, "My friends have wended forth
    With farewells smooth and kind;
  Mine oldest friend, my plighted bride,
    Ye need not stay behind:
  Friend, wed my fair bride for my sake,
  And let my lands ancestral make
    A dower for Rosalind.


  IV.

  "And when beside your wassail board
    Ye bless your social lot,
  I charge you that the giver be
    In all his gifts forgot,
  Or alone of all his words recall
    The last,--Lament me not."


  V.

  She looked upon him silently
    With her large, doubting eyes,
  Like a child that never knew but love
    Whom words of wrath surprise,
  Till the rose did break from either cheek
    And the sudden tears did rise.


  VI.

  She looked upon him mournfully,
    While her large eyes were grown
  Yet larger with the steady tears,
    Till, all his purpose known,
  She turned slow, as she would go--
    The tears were shaken down.


  VII.

  She turned slow, as she would go,
    Then quickly turned again,
  And gazing in his face to seek
    Some little touch of pain,
  "I thought," she said,--but shook her head,--
    She tried that speech in vain.


  VIII.

  "I thought--but I am half a child
    And very sage art thou--
  The teachings of the heaven and earth
    Should keep us soft and low:
  They have drawn _my_ tears in early years,
    Or ere I wept--as now.


  IX.

  "But now that in thy face I read
    Their cruel homily,
  Before their beauty I would fain
    Untouched, unsoftened be,--
  If I indeed could look on even
  The senseless, loveless earth and heaven
    As thou canst look on me!


  X.

  "And couldest thou as coldly view
    Thy childhood's far abode,
  Where little feet kept time with thine
    Along the dewy sod,
  And thy mother's look from holy book
    Rose like a thought of God?


  XI.

  "O brother,--called so, ere her last
    Betrothing words were said!
  O fellow-watcher in her room,
    With hushed voice and tread!
  Rememberest thou how, hand in hand
  O friend, O lover, we did stand,
    And knew that she was dead?


  XII.

  "I will not live Sir Roland's bride,
    That dower I will not hold;
  I tread below my feet that go,
    These parchments bought and sold:
  The tears I weep are mine to keep,
    And worthier than thy gold."


  XIII.

  The poet and Sir Roland stood
    Alone, each turned to each,
  Till Roland brake the silence left
    By that soft-throbbing speech--
  "Poor heart!" he cried, "it vainly tried
    The distant heart to reach.


  XIV.

  "And thou, O distant, sinful heart
    That climbest up so high
  To wrap and blind thee with the snows
    That cause to dream and die,
  What blessing can, from lips of man,
    Approach thee with his sigh?


  XV.

  "Ay, what from earth--create for man
    And moaning in his moan?
  Ay, what from stars--revealed to man
    And man-named one by one?
  Ay, more! what blessing can be given
  Where the Spirits seven do show in heaven
    A MAN upon the throne?


  XVI.

  "A man on earth HE wandered once,
    All meek and undefiled,
  And those who loved Him said 'He wept'--
    None ever said He smiled;
  Yet there might have been a smile unseen,
  When He bowed his holy face, I ween,
    To bless that happy child.


  XVII.

  "And now HE pleadeth up in heaven
    For our humanities,
  Till the ruddy light on seraphs' wings
    In pale emotion dies.
  They can better bear their Godhead's glare
    Than the pathos of his eyes.


  XVIII.

  "I will go pray our God to-day
    To teach thee how to scan
  His work divine, for human use
    Since earth on axle ran,--
  To teach thee to discern as plain
  His grief divine, the blood-drop's stain
    He left there, MAN for man.


  XIX.

  "So, for the blood's sake shed by Him
    Whom angels God declare,
  Tears like it, moist and warm with love,
    Thy reverent eyes shall wear
  To see i' the face of Adam's race
    The nature God doth share."


  XX.

  "I heard," the poet said, "thy voice
    As dimly as thy breath:
  The sound was like the noise of life
    To one anear his death,--
  Or of waves that fail to stir the pale
    Sere leaf they roll beneath.


  XXI.

  "And still between the sound and me
    White creatures like a mist
  Did interfloat confusedly,
    Mysterious shapes unwist:
  Across my heart and across my brow
  I felt them droop like wreaths of snow,
    To still the pulse they kist.


  XXII.

  "The castle and its lands are thine--
    The poor's--it shall be done.
  Go, _man_, to love! I go to live
    In Courland hall, alone:
  The bats along the ceilings cling,
  The lizards in the floors do run,
  And storms and years have worn and reft
  The stain by human builders left
    In working at the stone."


PART THE THIRD.

SHOWING HOW THE VOW WAS KEPT.


  I.

  He dwelt alone, and sun and moon
    Were witness that he made
  Rejection of his humanness
    Until they seemed to fade;
  His face did so, for he did grow
    Of his own soul afraid.


  II.

  The self-poised God may dwell alone
    With inward glorying,
  But God's chief angel waiteth for
    A brother's voice, to sing;
  And a lonely creature of sinful nature
    It is an awful thing.


  III.

  An awful thing that feared itself;
    While many years did roll,
  A lonely man, a feeble man,
    A part beneath the whole,
  He bore by day, he bore by night
  That pressure of God's infinite
    Upon his finite soul.


  IV.

  The poet at his lattice sate,
    And downward looked he.
  Three Christians wended by to prayers,
    With mute ones in their ee;
  Each turned above a face of love
    And called him to the far chapelle
  With voice more tuneful than its bell:
    But still they wended three.


  V.

  There journeyed by a bridal pomp,
    A bridegroom and his dame;
  He speaketh low for happiness,
    She blusheth red for shame:
  But never a tone of benison
    From out the lattice came.


  VI.

  A little child with inward song,
    No louder noise to dare,
  Stood near the wall to see at play
    The lizards green and rare--
  Unblessed the while for his childish smile
    Which cometh unaware.


PART THE FOURTH.

SHOWING HOW ROSALIND FARED BY THE KEEPING OF THE VOW.


  I.

  In death-sheets lieth Rosalind
    As white and still as they;
  And the old nurse that watched her bed
    Rose up with "Well-a-day!"
  And oped the casement to let in
  The sun, and that sweet doubtful din
  Which droppeth from the grass and bough
  Sans wind and bird, none knoweth how--
    To cheer her as she lay.


  II.

  The old nurse started when she saw
    Her sudden look of woe:
  But the quick wan tremblings round her mouth
    In a meek smile did go,
  And calm she said, "When I am dead,
    Dear nurse it shall be so.


  III.

  "Till then, shut out those sights and sounds,
    And pray God pardon me
  That I without this pain no more
    His blessed works can see!
  And lean beside me, loving nurse,
  That thou mayst hear, ere I am worse,
    What thy last love should be."


  IV.

  The loving nurse leant over her,
    As white she lay beneath;
  The old eyes searching, dim with life,
    The young ones dim with death,
  To read their look if sound forsook
    The trying, trembling breath.


  V.

  "When all this feeble breath is done,
    And I on bier am laid,
  My tresses smoothed for never a feast,
    My body in shroud arrayed,
  Uplift each palm in a saintly calm,
    As if that still I prayed.


  VI.

  "And heap beneath mine head the flowers
    You stoop so low to pull,
  The little white flowers from the wood
    Which grow there in the cool,
  Which _he_ and I, in childhood's games,
  Went plucking, knowing not their names,
    And filled thine apron full.


  VII.

  "Weep not! _I_ weep not. Death is strong,
    The eyes of Death are dry!
  But lay this scroll upon my breast
    When hushed its heavings lie,
  And wait awhile for the corpse's smile
    Which shineth presently.


  VIII.

  "And when it shineth, straightway call
    Thy youngest children dear,
  And bid them gently carry me
    All barefaced on the bier;
  But bid them pass my kirkyard grass
    That waveth long anear.


  IX.

  "And up the bank where I used to sit
    And dream what life would be,
  Along the brook with its sunny look
    Akin to living glee,--
  O'er the windy hill, through the forest still,
    Let them gently carry me.


  X.

  "And through the piny forest still,
    And down the open moorland
  Round where the sea beats mistily
    And blindly on the foreland;
  And let them chant that hymn I know,
  Bearing me soft, bearing me slow,
    To the ancient hall of Courland.


  XI.

  "And when withal they near the hall,
    In silence let them lay
  My bier before the bolted door,
    And leave it for a day:
  For I have vowed, though I am proud,
  To go there as a guest in shroud,
    And not be turned away."


  XII.

  The old nurse looked within her eyes
    Whose mutual look was gone;
  The old nurse stooped upon her mouth,
    Whose answering voice was done;
  And nought she heard, till a little bird
    Upon the casement's woodbine swinging
  Broke out into a loud sweet singing
    For joy o' the summer sun:
  "Alack! alack!"--she watched no more,
    With head on knee she wailed sore,
  And the little bird sang o'er and o'er
    For joy o' the summer sun.


PART THE FIFTH.

SHOWING HOW THE VOW WAS BROKEN.


  I.

  The poet oped his bolted door
    The midnight sky to view;
  A spirit-feel was in the air
  Which seemed to touch his spirit bare
    Whenever his breath he drew;
  And the stars a liquid softness had,
  As alone their holiness forbade
    Their falling with the dew.


  II.

  They shine upon the steadfast hills,
    Upon the swinging tide,
  Upon the narrow track of beach
    And the murmuring pebbles pied:
  They shine on every lovely place,
  They shine upon the corpse's face,
    As _it_ were fair beside.


  III.

  It lay before him, humanlike,
    Yet so unlike a thing!
  More awful in its shrouded pomp
    Than any crowned king:
  All calm and cold, as it did hold
    Some secret, glorying.


  IV.

  A heavier weight than of its clay
    Clung to his heart and knee:
  As if those folded palms could strike
    He staggered groaningly,
  And then o'erhung, without a groan,
  The meek close mouth that smiled alone,
    Whose speech the scroll must be.

       *       *       *       *       *


  THE WORDS OF ROSALIND'S SCROLL.

  "I left thee last, a child at heart,
    A woman scarce in years.
  I come to thee, a solemn corpse
    Which neither feels nor fears.
  I have no breath to use in sighs;
  They laid the dead-weights on mine eyes
    To seal them safe from tears.

  "Look on me with thine own calm look:
    I meet it calm as thou.
  No look of thine can change _this_ smile,
    Or break thy sinful vow:
  I tell thee that my poor scorned heart
  Is of thine earth--thine earth, a part:
    It cannot vex thee now.

  "But out, alas! these words are writ
    By a living, loving one,
  Adown whose cheeks, the proofs of life
    The warm quick tears do run:
  Ah, let the unloving corpse control
  Thy scorn back from the loving soul
    Whose place of rest is won.

  "I have prayed for thee with bursting sob
    When passion's course was free;
  I have prayed for thee with silent lips,
    In the anguish none could see:
  They whispered oft, 'She sleepeth soft'--
    But I only prayed for thee.

  "Go to! I pray for thee no more:
    The corpse's tongue is still,
  Its folded fingers point to heaven,
    But point there stiff and chill:
  No farther wrong, no farther woe
  Hath license from the sin below
    Its tranquil heart to thrill.

  "I charge thee, by the living's prayer,
    And the dead's silentness,
  To wring from out thy soul a cry
    Which God shall hear and bless!
  Lest Heaven's own palm droop in my hand,
  And pale among the saints I stand,
    A saint companionless."

       *       *       *       *       *


  V.

  Bow lower down before the throne,
    Triumphant Rosalind!
  He boweth on thy corpse his face,
    And weepeth as the blind:
  'Twas a dread sight to see them so,
  For the senseless corpse rocked to and fro
    With the wail of his living mind.


  VI.

  But dreader sight, could such be seen,
    His inward mind did lie,
  Whose long-subjected humanness
    Gave out its lion-cry,
  And fiercely rent its tenement
    In a mortal agony.


  VII.

  I tell you, friends, had you heard his wail,
    'Twould haunt you in court and mart,
  And in merry feast until you set
    Your cup down to depart--
  That weeping wild of a reckless child
    From a proud man's broken heart.


  VIII.

  O broken heart, O broken vow,
    That wore so proud a feature!
  God, grasping as a thunderbolt
    The man's rejected nature,
  Smote him therewith i' the presence high
  Of his so worshipped earth and sky
  That looked on all indifferently--
    A wailing human creature.


  IX.

  A human creature found too weak
    To bear his human pain--
  (May Heaven's dear grace have spoken peace
     To his dying heart and brain!)
  For when they came at dawn of day
  To lift the lady's corpse away,
    Her bier was holding twain.


  X.

  They dug beneath the kirkyard grass,
    For born one dwelling deep;
  To which, when years had mossed the stone,
  Sir Roland brought his little son
    To watch the funeral heap:
  And when the happy boy would rather
    Turn upward his blithe eyes to see
    The wood-doves nodding from the tree,
  "Nay, boy, look downward," said his father,
  "Upon this human dust asleep.
  And hold it in thy constant ken
  That God's own unity compresses
    (One into one) the human many,
  And that his everlastingness is
    The bond which is not loosed by any:
  That thou and I this law must keep,
    If not in love, in sorrow then,--
    Though smiling not like other men,
  Still, like them we must weep."


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
LONDON

  +-----------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Transcriber's Notes:                                            |
  |                                                                 |
  | Words surrounded by _ are italicized.                           |
  |                                                                 |
  | Words encased in = are in Hebrew. Due to the restriction of the |
  | latin-1 font, they have been converted into latin characters.   |
  |                                                                 |
  | The author's punctuations have been kept, except on page 221,   |
  | a fullstop added to the end of the poem (thee for weeping.)     |
  |                                                                 |
  | On page xx (Contents), page number "155" for Epilogue corrected |
  | to be "150."                                                    |
  |                                                                 |
  | All apparent printer's errors and variable spellings retained.  |
  | This includes:                                                  |
  | - The use of both modern and archaic spellings of the same      |
  |   word, for example:                                            |
  |   "corpse" and "corse"                                          |
  |   "like" and "liker"                                            |
  |   "obtain" and "obtayne"                                        |
  | - The variable use of accent in the same word, for example:     |
  |   "Aphrodite" and "Aphrodite"                                   |
  |   "Here" and "Here"                                             |
  |   "wailed" and "wailed"                                         |
  | - The use of phrases with and without hyphen, for example:      |
  |   "full-length" and "full length"                               |
  |   "God-light" and "Godlight"                                    |
  |   "red-clay" and "red clay"                                     |
  |                                                                 |
  +-----------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of Elizabeth
Barrett Browning, Vol. I, by Elizabeth  Barrett Browning

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POETICAL WORKS OF ***

***** This file should be named 37452-8.txt or 37452-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/4/5/37452/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Judith Wirawan, Henry Craig
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
?The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of Elizabeth Barrett
Browning, by Elizabeth Barrett Browning

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Poetical Works of Elizabeth Barrett Browning
       Volume II

Author: Elizabeth Barrett Browning

Release Date: August 6, 2010 [EBook #33363]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POETICAL WORKS OF E. B. BARRETT ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Chandra Friend and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    THE POETICAL WORKS
    OF
    ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING

    _In Six Volumes_

    VOL. II.


    LONDON
    SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE
    1890




CONTENTS.


                                                    PAGE

    THE ROMAUNT OF MARGRET                            3
    ISOBEL'S CHILD                                   15
    THE ROMAUNT OF THE PAGE                          40
    THE LAY OF THE BROWN ROSARY.
          FIRST PART                                 57
          SECOND PART                                63
          THIRD PART                                 72
          FOURTH PART                                80
    A ROMANCE OF THE GANGES                          83
    RHYME OF THE DUCHESS MAY                         94
          THE RHYME                                  96
    THE ROMANCE OF THE SWAN'S NEST                  132
    BERTHA IN THE LANE                              138
    LADY GERALDINE'S COURTSHIP                      150
    THE RUNAWAY SLAVE AT PILGRIM'S POINT            192
    THE CRY OF THE CHILDREN                         205
    A CHILD ASLEEP                                  213
    THE FOURFOLD ASPECT                             217
    NIGHT AND THE MERRY MAN.
          NIGHT                                     223
          THE MERRY MAN                             224
    EARTH AND HER PRAISERS                          229
    THE VIRGIN MARY TO THE CHILD JESUS              239
    AN ISLAND                                       248
    THE SOUL'S TRAVELLING                           259
    TO BETTINE, THE CHILD-FRIEND OF GOETHE          270
    MAN AND NATURE                                  274
    A SEA-SIDE WALK                                 276
    THE SEA-MEW                                     278
    FELICIA HEMANS TO L. E. L.                      281
    L. E. L.'S LAST QUESTION                        284




POEMS




_THE ROMAUNT OF MARGRET._

    Can my affections find out nothing best,
      But still and still remove?

    QUARLES.


    I.

      I plant a tree whose leaf
        The yew-tree leaf will suit:
    But when its shade is o'er you laid,
        Turn round and pluck the fruit.
    Now reach my harp from off the wall
        Where shines the sun aslant;
    The sun may shine and we be cold!
    O hearken, loving hearts and bold,
        Unto my wild romaunt.
                Margret, Margret.

    II.

      Sitteth the fair ladye
        Close to the river side
    Which runneth on with a merry tone
        Her merry thoughts to guide:
      It runneth through the trees,
        It runneth by the hill,
    Nathless the lady's thoughts have found
        A way more pleasant still
                Margret, Margret.

    III.

      The night is in her hair
        And giveth shade to shade,
    And the pale moonlight on her forehead white
        Like a spirit's hand is laid;
      Her lips part with a smile
        Instead of speakings done:
    I ween, she thinketh of a voice,
        Albeit uttering none.
                Margret, Margret.

    IV.

      All little birds do sit
        With heads beneath their wings:
    Nature doth seem in a mystic dream,
        Absorbed from her living things:
      That dream by that ladye
        Is certes unpartook,
    For she looketh to the high cold stars
        With a tender human look
                Margret, Margret.

    V.

      The lady's shadow lies
        Upon the running river;
    It lieth no less in its quietness,
        For that which resteth never:
      Most like a trusting heart
        Upon a passing faith,
    Or as upon the course of life
        The steadfast doom of death.
                Margret, Margret.

    VI.

      The lady doth not move,
        The lady doth not dream,
    Yet she seeth her shade no longer laid
        In rest upon the stream:
      It shaketh without wind,
        It parteth from the tide,
    It standeth upright in the cleft moonlight,
        It sitteth at her side.
                Margret, Margret.

    VII.

      Look in its face, ladye,
        And keep thee from thy swound;
    With a spirit bold thy pulses hold
        And hear its voice's sound:
      For so will sound thy voice
        When thy face is to the wall,
    And such will be thy face, ladye,
        When the maidens work thy pall.
                Margret, Margret.

    VIII.

      "Am I not like to thee?"
        The voice was calm and low,
    And between each word you might have heard
        The silent forests grow;
      "_The like may sway the like;_"
        By which mysterious law
    Mine eyes from thine and my lips from thine
        The light and breath may draw.
                Margret, Margret.

    IX.

      "My lips do need thy breath,
        My lips do need thy smile,
    And my pallid eyne, that light in thine
        Which met the stars erewhile:
      Yet go with light and life
        If that thou lovest one
    In all the earth who loveth thee
        As truly as the sun,
                Margret, Margret."

    X.

      Her cheek had waxed white
        Like cloud at fall of snow;
    Then like to one at set of sun,
        It waxed red also;
      For love's name maketh bold
        As if the loved were near:
    And then she sighed the deep long sigh
        Which cometh after fear.
                Margret, Margret.

    XI.

      "Now, sooth, I fear thee not--
        Shall never fear thee now!"
    (And a noble sight was the sudden light
        Which lit her lifted brow.)
      "Can earth be dry of streams,
        Or hearts of love?" she said;
    "Who doubteth love, can know not love:
        He is already dead."
                Margret, Margret.

    XII.

      "I have" ... and here her lips
        Some word in pause did keep,
    And gave the while a quiet smile
        As if they paused in sleep,--
      "I have ... a brother dear,
        A knight of knightly fame!
    I broidered him a knightly scarf
        With letters of my name
                Margret, Margret.

    XIII.

      "I fed his grey goshawk,
        I kissed his fierce bloodhound,
    I sate at home when he might come
        And caught his horn's far sound:
      I sang him hunter's songs,
        I poured him the red wine,
    He looked across the cup and said,
        _I love thee, sister mine._"
                Margret, Margret.

    XIV.

      IT trembled on the grass
        With a low, shadowy laughter;
    The sounding river which rolled, for ever
        Stood dumb and stagnant after:
      "Brave knight thy brother is!
        But better loveth he
    Thy chaliced wine than thy chaunted song,
        And better both than thee,
                Margret, Margret."

    XV.

      The lady did not heed
        The river's silence while
    Her own thoughts still ran at their will,
        And calm was still her smile.
      "My little sister wears
        The look our mother wore:
    I smooth her locks with a golden comb,
        I bless her evermore."
                Margret, Margret.

    XVI.

      "I gave her my first bird
        When first my voice it knew;
    I made her share my posies rare
        And told her where they grew:
      I taught her God's dear name
        With prayer and praise to tell,
    She looked from heaven into my face
        And said, _I love thee well._"
                Margret, Margret.

    XVII.

      IT trembled on the grass
        With a low, shadowy laughter;
    You could see each bird as it woke and stared
        Through the shrivelled foliage after.
      "Fair child thy sister is!
        But better loveth she
    Thy golden comb than thy gathered flowers,
        And better both than thee,
                Margret, Margret."

    XVIII.

      Thy lady did not heed
        The withering on the bough;
    Still calm her smile albeit the while
        A little pale her brow:
      "I have a father old,
        The lord of ancient halls;
    An hundred friends are in his court
        Yet only me he calls.
                Margret, Margret.

    XIX.

      "An hundred knights are in his court
        Yet read I by his knee;
    And when forth they go to the tourney-show
        I rise not up to see:
      'T is a weary book to read,
        My tryst's at set of sun,
    But loving and dear beneath the stars
        Is his blessing when I've done."
                Margret, Margret.

    XX.

      IT trembled on the grass
        With a low, shadowy laughter;
    And moon and star though bright and far
        Did shrink and darken after.
      "High lord thy father is!
        But better loveth he
    His ancient halls than his hundred friends,
        His ancient halls, than thee,
                Margret, Margret."

    XXI.

      The lady did not heed
        That the far stars did fail;
    Still calm her smile, albeit the while ...
        Nay, but she is not pale!
      "I have more than a friend
        Across the mountains dim:
    No other's voice is soft to me,
        Unless it nameth _him_."
                Margret, Margret.

    XXII.

      "Though louder beats my heart,
        I know his tread again,
    And his fair plume aye, unless turned away,
        For the tears do blind me then:
      We brake no gold, a sign
        Of stronger faith to be,
    But I wear his last look in my soul,
        Which said, _I love but thee!_"
                Margret, Margret.

    XXIII.

      IT trembled on the grass
        With a low, shadowy laughter;
    And the wind did toll, as a passing soul
        Were sped by church-bell after;
      And shadows, 'stead of light,
        Fell from the stars above,
    In flakes of darkness on her face
        Still bright with trusting love.
                Margret, Margret.

    XXIV.

      "He _loved_ but only thee!
        _That_ love is transient too.
    The wild hawk's bill doth dabble still
        I' the mouth that vowed thee true:
      Will he open his dull eyes
        When tears fall on his brow?
    Behold, the death-worm to his heart
        Is a nearer thing than _thou_,
                Margret, Margret."

    XXV.

      Her face was on the ground--
        None saw the agony;
    But the men at sea did that night agree
        They heard a drowning cry:
      And when the morning brake,
        Fast rolled the river's tide,
    With the green trees waving overhead
        And a white corse laid beside.
                Margret, Margret.

    XXVI.

      A knight's bloodhound and he
        The funeral watch did keep;
    With a thought o' the chase he stroked its face
        As it howled to see him weep.
      A fair child kissed the dead,
        But shrank before its cold.
    And alone yet proudly in his hall
        Did stand a baron old.
                Margret, Margret.

    XXVII.

      Hang up my harp again!
        I have no voice for song.
    Not song but wail, and mourners pale,
        Not bards, to love belong.
      O failing human love!
        O light, by darkness known!
    O false, the while thou treadest earth!
        O deaf beneath the stone!
                Margret, Margret.




_ISOBEL'S CHILD._

          ----so find we profit,
    By losing of our prayers.

    SHAKESPEARE.


    I.

    To rest the weary nurse has gone:
      An eight-day watch had watched she,
    Still rocking beneath sun and moon
      The baby on her knee,
    Till Isobel its mother said
    "The fever waneth--wend to bed,
      For now the watch comes round to me."

    II.

      Then wearily the nurse did throw
        Her pallet in the darkest place
    Of that sick room, and slept and dreamed:
      For, as the gusty wind did blow
        The night-lamp's flare across her face,
    She saw or seemed to see, but dreamed,
      That the poplars tall on the opposite hill,
    The seven tall poplars on the hill,
    Did clasp the setting sun until
    His rays dropped from him, pined and still
      As blossoms in frost,
    Till he waned and paled, so weirdly crossed,
    To the colour of moonlight which doth pass
    Over the dank ridged churchyard grass.
    The poplars held the sun, and he
    The eyes of the nurse that they should not see
    --Not for a moment, the babe on her knee,
    Though she shuddered to feel that it grew to be
    Too chill, and lay too heavily.

    III.

    She only dreamed; for all the while
      'T was Lady Isobel that kept
      The little baby: and it slept
    Fast, warm, as if its mother's smile,
    Laden with love's dewy weight,
    And red as rose of Harpocrate
    Dropt upon its eyelids, pressed
    Lashes to cheek in a sealed rest.

    IV.

    And more and more smiled Isobel
    To see the baby sleep so well--
    She knew not that she smiled.
    Against the lattice, dull and wild
    Drive the heavy droning drops,
      Drop by drop, the sound being one;
    As momently time's segments fall
    On the ear of God, who hears through all
      Eternity's unbroken monotone:
    And more and more smiled Isobel
    To see the baby sleep so well--
    She knew not that she smiled.
    The wind in intermission stops
      Down in the beechen forest,
        Then cries aloud
      As one at the sorest,
        Self-stung, self-driven,
    And rises up to its very tops,
    Stiffening erect the branches bowed,
      Dilating with a tempest-soul
    The trees that with their dark hands break
    Through their own outline, and heavy roll
      Shadows as massive as clouds in heaven
        Across the castle lake
    And more and more smiled Isobel
    To see the baby sleep so well;
    She knew not that she smiled;
    She knew not that the storm was wild;
    Through the uproar drear she could not hear
    The castle clock which struck anear--
    She heard the low, light breathing of her child.

    V.

    O sight for wondering look!
    While the external nature broke
    Into such abandonment,
    While the very mist, heart-rent
    By the lightning, seemed to eddy
    Against nature, with a din,--
    A sense of silence and of steady
    Natural calm appeared to come
    From things without, and enter in
    The human creature's room.

    VI.

    So motionless she sate,
      The babe asleep upon her knees,
    You might have dreamed their souls had gone
    Away to things inanimate,
    In such to live, in such to moan;
    And that their bodies had ta'en back,
      In mystic change, all silences
    That cross the sky in cloudy rack,
    Or dwell beneath the reedy ground
    In waters safe from their own sound:
        Only she wore
    The deepening smile I named before,
    And _that_ a deepening love expressed;
    And who at once can love and rest?

    VII.

    In sooth the smile that then was keeping
    Watch upon the baby sleeping,
      Floated with its tender light
    Downward, from the drooping eyes,
    Upward, from the lips apart,
      Over cheeks which had grown white
    With an eight-day weeping:
    All smiles come in such a wise
      Where tears shall fall or have of old--
    Like northern lights that fill the heart
      Of heaven in sign of cold.

    VIII.

    Motionless she sate.
    Her hair had fallen by its weight
    On each side of her smile and lay
    Very blackly on the arm
    Where the baby nestled warm,
    Pale as baby carved in stone
    Seen by glimpses of the moon
      Up a dark cathedral aisle:
    But, through the storm, no moonbeam fell
    Upon the child of Isobel--
    Perhaps you saw it by the ray
      Alone of her still smile.

    IX.

          A solemn thing it is to me
            To look upon a babe that sleeps
            Wearing in its spirit-deeps
          The undeveloped mystery
            Of our Adam's taint and woe,
          Which, when they developed be,
            Will not let it slumber so;
          Lying new in life beneath
          The shadow of the coming death,
          With that soft, low, quiet breath,
            As if it felt the sun;
          Knowing all things by their blooms,
          Not their roots, yea, sun and sky
          Only by the warmth that comes
          Out of each, earth only by
            The pleasant hues that o'er it run,
          And human love by drops of sweet
            White nourishment still hanging round
            The little mouth so slumber-bound:
          All which broken sentiency
          And conclusion incomplete,
            Will gather and unite and climb
          To an immortality
            Good or evil, each sublime,
          Through life and death to life again.
            O little lids, now folded fast,
            Must ye learn to drop at last
              Our large and burning tears?
          O warm quick body, must thou lie,
          When the time comes round to die,
              Still from all the whirl of years,
          Bare of all the joy and pain?
          O small frail being, wilt thou stand
          At God's right hand,
          Lifting up those sleeping eyes
          Dilated by great destinies,
    To an endless waking? thrones and seraphim.
    Through the long ranks of their solemnities,
    Sunning thee with calm looks of Heaven's surprise,
          But thine alone on Him?
    Or else, self-willed, to tread the Godless place,
    (God keep thy will!) feel thine own energies
    Cold, strong, objectless, like a dead man's clasp,
    The sleepless deathless life within thee grasp,--
    While myriad faces, like one changeless face,
    With woe _not love's_, shall glass thee everywhere
    And overcome thee with thine own despair?

    X.

    More soft, less solemn images
    Drifted o'er the lady's heart
      Silently as snow.
    She had seen eight days depart
    Hour by hour, on bended knees,
      With pale-wrung hands and prayings low
    And broken, through which came the sound
    Of tears that fell against the ground,
    Making sad stops.--"Dear Lord, dear Lord!"
    She still had prayed, (the heavenly word
    Broken by an earthly sigh)
    --"Thou who didst not erst deny
    The mother-joy to Mary mild,
    Blessed in the blessed child
    Which hearkened in meek babyhood
    Her cradle-hymn, albeit used
    To all that music interfused
    In breasts of angels high and good!
    Oh, take not, Lord, my babe away--
    Oh, take not to thy songful heaven
    The pretty baby thou hast given,
    Or ere that I have seen him play
    Around his father's knees and known
    That _he_ knew how my love has gone
    From all the world to him.
    Think, God among the cherubim,
    How I shall shiver every day
    In thy June sunshine, knowing where
    The grave-grass keeps it from his fair
    Still cheeks: and feel, at every tread,
    His little body, which is dead
    And hidden in thy turfy fold,
    Doth make thy whole warm earth a-cold!
    O God, I am so young, so young--
      I am not used to tears at nights
    Instead of slumber--not to prayer
    With sobbing lips and hands out-wrung!
    Thou knowest all my prayings were
      'I bless thee, God, for past delights--
    Thank God!' I am not used to bear
    Hard thoughts of death; the earth doth cover
    No face from me of friend or lover:
    And must the first who teaches me
    The form of shrouds and funerals, be
    Mine own first-born beloved? he
    Who taught me first this mother-love?
    Dear Lord who spreadest out above
    Thy loving, transpierced hands to meet
    All lifted hearts with blessing sweet,--
    Pierce not my heart, my tender heart
    Thou madest tender! Thou who art
    So happy in thy heaven alway,
    Take not mine only bliss away!"

    XI.

    She so had prayed: and God, who hears
    Through seraph-songs the sound of tears
    From that beloved babe had ta'en
    The fever and the beating pain.
    And more and more smiled Isobel
    To see the baby sleep so well,
      (She knew not that she smiled, I wis)
    Until the pleasant gradual thought
    Which near her heart the smile enwrought,
    Now soft and slow, itself did seem
    To float along a happy dream,
      Beyond it into speech like this.

    XII.

    "I prayed for thee, my little child,
      And God has heard my prayer!
    And when thy babyhood is gone,
    We two together undefiled
    By men's repinings, will kneel down
      Upon His earth which will be fair
    (Not covering thee, sweet!) to us twain,
      And give Him thankful praise."

    XIII.

    Dully and wildly drives the rain:
    Against the lattices drives the rain.

    XIV.

    "I thank Him now, that I can think
      Of those same future days,
    Nor from the harmless image shrink
      Of what I there might see--
    Strange babies on their mothers' knee,
    Whose innocent soft faces might
    From off mine eyelids strike the light,
      With looks not meant for me!"

    XV.

    Gustily blows the wind through the rain,
    As against the lattices drives the rain.

    XVI.

    "But now, O baby mine, together,
      We turn this hope of ours again
    To many an hour of summer weather,
    When we shall sit and intertwine
      Our spirits, and instruct each other
      In the pure loves of child and mother!
    Two human loves make one divine."

    XVII.

    The thunder tears through the wind and the rain,
    As full on the lattices drives the rain.

    XVIII.

    "My little child, what wilt thou choose?
      Now let me look at thee and ponder.
    What gladness, from the gladnesses
      Futurity is spreading under
    Thy gladsome sight? Beneath the trees
    Wilt thou lean all day, and lose
    Thy spirit with the river seen
    Intermittently between
      The winding beechen alleys,--
    Half in labour, half repose,
      Like a shepherd keeping sheep,
      Thou, with only thoughts to keep
    Which never a bound will overpass,
    And which are innocent as those
      That feed among Arcadian valleys
          Upon the dewy grass?"

    XIX.

    The large white owl that with age is blind,
      That hath sate for years in the old tree hollow,
    Is carried away in a gust of wind;
    His wings could beat him not as fast
    As he goeth now the lattice past;
      He is borne by the winds, the rains do follow
    His white wings to the blast outflowing,
        He hooteth in going,
    And still, in the lightnings, coldly glitter
        His round unblinking eyes

    XX.

    "Or, baby, wilt thou think it fitter
      To be eloquent and wise,
    One upon whose lips the air
      Turns to solemn verities
    For men to breathe anew, and win
    A deeper-seated life within?
    Wilt be a philosopher,
      By whose voice the earth and skies
    Shall speak to the unborn?
    Or a poet, broadly spreading
      The golden immortalities
    Of thy soul on natures lorn
      And poor of such, them all to guard
    From their decay,--beneath thy treading,
    Earth's flowers recovering hues of Eden,--
    And stars, drawn downward by thy looks,
    To shine ascendant in thy books?"

    XXI.

      The tame hawk in the castle-yard,
    How it screams to the lightning, with its wet
    Jagged plumes overhanging the parapet!
    And at the lady's door the hound
    Scratches with a crying sound.

    XXII.

    "But, O my babe, thy lids are laid
      Close, fast upon thy cheek,
    And not a dream of power and sheen
    Can make a passage up between;
    Thy heart is of thy mother's made,
      Thy looks are very meek,
    And it will be their chosen place
    To rest on some beloved face,
      As these on thine, and let the noise
    Of the whole world go on nor drown
      The tender silence of thy joys:
    Or when that silence shall have grown
      Too tender for itself, the same
    Yearning for sound,--to look above
    And utter its one meaning, LOVE,
      That _He_ may hear His name."

    XXIII.

    No wind, no rain, no thunder!
    The waters had trickled not slowly,
    The thunder was not spent
    Nor the wind near finishing;
    Who would have said that the storm was diminishing?
    No wind, no rain, no thunder!
    Their noises dropped asunder
    From the earth and the firmament,
    From the towers and the lattices,
    Abrupt and echoless
    As ripe fruits on the ground unshaken wholly
        As life in death.
    And sudden and solemn the silence fell,
    Startling the heart of Isobel
      As the tempest could not:
    Against the door went panting the breath
    Of the lady's hound whose cry was still,
      And she, constrained howe'er she would not,
    Lifted her eyes and saw the moon
    Looking out of heaven alone
      Upon the poplared hill,--
      A calm of God, made visible
      That men might bless it at their will.

    XXIV.

    The moonshine on the baby's face
      Falleth clear and cold:
    The mother's looks have fallen back
      To the same place:
    Because no moon with silver rack,
    Nor broad sunrise in jasper skies
        Has power to hold
        Our loving eyes,
    Which still revert, as ever must
    Wonder and Hope, to gaze on the dust.

    XXV.

    The moonshine on the baby's face
      Cold and clear remaineth;
    The mother's looks do shrink away,--
    The mother's looks return to stay,
      As charmed by what paineth:
    Is any glamour in the case?
      Is it dream, or is it sight?
    Hath the change upon the wild
      Elements that sign the night,
    Passed upon the child?
      It is not dream, but sight.

    XXVI.

    The babe has awakened from sleep
      And unto the gaze of its mother,
      Bent over it, lifted another--
      Not the baby-looks that go
      Unaimingly to and fro,
    But an earnest gazing deep
    Such as soul gives soul at length
      When by work and wail of years
    It winneth a solemn strength
      And mourneth as it wears.
    A strong man could not brook,
      With pulse unhurried by fears,
    To meet that baby's look
      O'erglazed by manhood's tears,
    The tears of a man full grown,
    With a power to wring our own,
    In the eyes all undefiled
    Of a little three-months' child--
    To see that babe-brow wrought
    By the witnessing of thought
      To judgment's prodigy,
    And the small soft mouth unweaned,
    By mother's kiss o'erleaned,
    (Putting the sound of loving
    Where no sound else was moving
      Except the speechless cry)
    Quickened to mind's expression,
    Shaped to articulation,
    Yea, uttering words, yea, naming woe,
      In tones that with it strangely went
      Because so baby-innocent,
    As the child spake out to the mother, so:--

    XXVII.

    "O mother, mother, loose thy prayer!
      Christ's name hath made it strong.
    It bindeth me, it holdeth me
    With its most loving cruelty,
      From floating my new soul along
      The happy heavenly air.
    It bindeth me, it holdeth me
      In all this dark, upon this dull
    Low earth, by only weepers trod.
    It bindeth me, it holdeth me!
      Mine angel looketh sorrowful
    Upon the face of God.[1]

    XXVIII.

    "Mother, mother, can I dream
      Beneath your earthly trees?
    I had a vision and a gleam,
      I heard a sound more sweet than these
    When rippled by the wind:
      Did you see the Dove with wings
      Bathed in golden glisterings
    From a sunless light behind,
      Dropping on me from the sky,
    Soft as mother's kiss, until
    I seemed to leap and yet was still?
      Saw you how His love-large eye
    Looked upon me mystic calms,
      Till the power of His divine
      Vision was indrawn to mine?

    XXIX.

    "Oh, the dream within the dream!
      I saw celestial places even.
    Oh, the vistas of high palms
      Making finites of delight
      Through the heavenly infinite,
    Lifting up their green still tops
      To the heaven of heaven!
    Oh, the sweet life-tree that drops
    Shade like light across the river
    Glorified in its for-ever
      Flowing from the Throne!
    Oh, the shining holinesses
    Of the thousand, thousand faces
      God-sunned by the throned ONE,
    And made intense with such a love
    That, though I saw them turned above,
    Each loving seemed for also me!
    And, oh, the Unspeakable, the HE,
    The manifest in secrecies
      Yet of mine own heart partaker
    With the overcoming look
    Of One who hath been once forsook
      And blesseth the forsaker!
    Mother, mother, let me go
    Toward the Face that looketh so!
      Through the mystic winged Four
    Whose are inward, outward eyes
    Dark with light of mysteries
      And the restless evermore
    'Holy, holy, holy,'--through
    The sevenfold Lamps that burn in view
      Of cherubim and seraphim,--
    Through the four-and-twenty crowned
    Stately elders white around,
      Suffer me to go to Him!

    XXX.

    "Is your wisdom very wise,
      Mother, on the narrow earth,
      Very happy, very worth
    That I should stay to learn?
    Are these air-corrupting sighs
      Fashioned by unlearned breath?
    Do the students' lamps that burn
      All night, illumine death?
    Mother, albeit this be so,
    Loose thy prayer and let me go
    Where that bright chief angel stands
    Apart from all his brother bands,
    Too glad for smiling, having bent
    In angelic wilderment
    O'er the depths of God, and brought
    Reeling thence one only thought
    To fill his own eternity.
    He the teacher is for me--
    He can teach what I would know--
    Mother, mother, let me go!

    XXXI.

    "Can your poet make an Eden
      No winter will undo,
    And light a starry fire while heeding
      His hearth's is burning too?
    Drown in music the earth's din,
    And keep his own wild soul within
      The law of his own harmony?
    Mother, albeit this be so,
    Let me to my heaven go!
      A little harp me waits thereby,
    A harp whose strings are golden all
    And tuned to music spherical,
    Hanging on the green life-tree
    Where no willows ever be.
    Shall I miss that harp of mine?
    Mother, no!--the Eye divine
    Turned upon it, makes it shine;
    And when I touch it, poems sweet
    Like separate souls shall fly from it,
    Each to the immortal fytte.
    We shall all be poets there,
    Gazing on the chiefest Fair.

    XXXII.

    "Love! earth's love! and _can_ we love
    Fixedly where all things move?
    Can the sinning love each other?
      Mother, mother,
    I tremble in thy close embrace,
    I feel thy tears adown my face,
      Thy prayers do keep me out of bliss--
    O dreary earthly love!
    Loose thy prayer and let me go
      To the place which loving is
    Yet not sad; and when is given
    Escape to _thee_ from this below,
    Thou shalt behold me that I wait
    For thee beside the happy Gate,
    And silence shall be up in heaven
      To hear our greeting kiss."

    XXXIII.

      The nurse awakes in the morning sun,
        And starts to see beside her bed
        The lady with a grandeur spread
      Like pathos o'er her face, as one
      God-satisfied and earth-undone;
        The babe upon her arm was dead:
    And the nurse could utter forth no cry,--
    She was awed by the calm in the mother's eye.

    XXXIV.

    "Wake, nurse!" the lady said;
      "_We_ are waking--he and I--
      I, on earth, and he, in sky:
    And thou must help me to o'erlay
    With garment white this little clay
      Which needs no more our lullaby.

    XXXV.

    "I changed the cruel prayer I made,
    And bowed my meekened face, and prayed
    That God would do His will; and thus
    He did it, nurse! He parted us:
    And His sun shows victorious
    The dead calm face,--and _I_ am calm,
    And Heaven is hearkening a new psalm.

    XXXVI.

    "This earthly noise is too anear,
    Too loud, and will not let me hear
    The little harp. My death will soon
    Make silence."

                  And a sense of tune,
    A satisfied love meanwhile
    Which nothing earthly could despoil,
    Sang on within her soul.

    XXXVII.

                             Oh you,
    Earth's tender and impassioned few,
    Take courage to entrust your love
    To Him so named who guards above
      Its ends and shall fulfil!
    Breaking the narrow prayers that may
    Befit your narrow hearts, away
      In His broad, loving will.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] For I say unto you that in Heaven their angels do always behold
the face of my Father which is in Heaven--_Matt._ xviii, 10.




_THE ROMAUNT OF THE PAGE._


    I.

    A knight of gallant deeds
      And a young page at his side,
    From the holy war in Palestine
      Did slow and thoughtful ride,
    As each were a palmer and told for beads
      The dews of the eventide.

    II.

    "O young page," said the knight,
      "A noble page art thou!
    Thou fearest not to steep in blood
      The curls upon thy brow;
    And once in the tent, and twice in the fight,
      Didst ward me a mortal blow."

    III.

    "O brave knight," said the page,
      "Or ere we hither came,
    We talked in tent, we talked in field,
      Of the bloody battle-game;
    But here, below this greenwood bough,
      I cannot speak the same.

    IV.

    "Our troop is far behind,
      The woodland calm is new;
    Our steeds, with slow grass-muffled hoofs,
      Tread deep the shadows through;
    And, in my mind, some blessing kind
      Is dropping with the dew.

    V.

    "The woodland calm is pure--
      I cannot choose but have
    A thought from these, o' the beechen-trees,
      Which in our England wave,
    And of the little finches fine
    Which sang there while in Palestine
      The warrior-hilt we drave.

    VI.

    "Methinks, a moment gone,
      I heard my mother pray!
    I heard, sir knight, the prayer for me
      Wherein she passed away;
    And I know the heavens are leaning down
      To hear what I shall say."

    VII.

    The page spake calm and high,
      As of no mean degree;
    Perhaps he felt in nature's broad
      Full heart, his own was free:
    And the knight looked up to his lifted eye,
      Then answered smilingly--

    VIII.

    "Sir page, I pray your grace!
      Certes, I meant not so
    To cross your pastoral mood, sir page,
      With the crook of the battle-bow;
    But a knight may speak of a lady's face,
    I ween, in any mood or place,
      If the grasses die or grow.

    IX.

    "And this I meant to say--
      My lady's face shall shine
    As ladies' faces use, to greet
      My page from Palestine;
    Or, speak she fair or prank she gay,
      She is no lady of mine.

    X.

    "And this I meant to fear--
      Her bower may suit thee ill;
    For, sooth, in that same field and tent,
      Thy _talk_ was somewhat still:
    And fitter thy hand for my knightly spear
      Than thy tongue for my lady's will!"

    XI.

    Slowly and thankfully
      The young page bowed his head;
    His large eyes seemed to muse a smile,
      Until he blushed instead,
    And no lady in her bower, pardie,
      Could blush more sudden red:
    "Sir Knight,--thy lady's bower to me
      Is suited well," he said.

    XII.

            _Beati, beati, mortui!_
            From the convent on the sea,
            One mile off, or scarce so nigh,
            Swells the dirge as clear and high
            As if that, over brake and lea,
            Bodily the wind did carry
            The great altar of Saint Mary,
            And the fifty tapers burning o'er it,
            And the lady Abbess dead before it,
            And the chanting nuns whom yesterweek
            Her voice did charge and bless,--
            Chanting steady, chanting meek,
            Chanting with a solemn breath,
            Because that they are thinking less
            Upon the dead than upon death.
            _Beati, beati, mortui!_
            Now the vision in the sound
            Wheeleth on the wind around;
            Now it sweepeth back, away--
            The uplands will not let it stay
            To dark the western sun:
            _Mortui!_--away at last,--
            Or ere the page's blush is past!
    And the knight heard all, and the page heard none.

    XIII.

            "A boon, thou noble knight,
              If ever I served thee!
    Though thou art a knight and I am a page,
              Now grant a boon to me;
    And tell me sooth, if dark or bright,
    If little loved or loved aright
      Be the face of thy ladye."

    XIV.

    Gloomily looked the knight--
      "As a son thou hast served me,
    And would to none I had granted boon
      Except to only thee!
    For haply then I should love aright,
    For then I should know if dark or bright
      Were the face of my ladye.

    XV.

    "Yet it ill suits my knightly tongue
      To grudge that granted boon,
    That heavy price from heart and life
      I paid in silence down;
    The hand that claimed it, cleared in fine
    My father's fame: I swear by mine,
      That price was nobly won!

    XVI.

    "Earl Walter was a brave old earl,
      He was my father's friend,
    And while I rode the lists at court
      And little guessed the end,
    My noble father in his shroud
    Against a slanderer lying loud,
      He rose up to defend.

    XVII.

    "Oh, calm below the marble grey
      My father's dust was strown!
    Oh, meek above the marble grey
      His image prayed alone!
    The slanderer lied: the wretch was brave--
    For, looking up the minster-nave,
    He saw my father's knightly glaive
      Was changed from steel to stone.

    XVIII.

    "Earl Walter's glaive was steel,
      With a brave old hand to wear it,
    And dashed the lie back in the mouth
    Which lied against the godly truth
      And against the knightly merit
    The slanderer, 'neath the avenger's heel,
    Struck up the dagger in appeal
    From stealthy lie to brutal force--
    And out upon the traitor's corse
      Was yielded the true spirit.

    XIX.

    "I would mine hand had fought that fight
      And justified my father!
    I would mine heart had caught that wound
      And slept beside him rather!
    I think it were a better thing
    Than murdered friend and marriage-ring
      Forced on my life together.

    XX.

    "Wail shook Earl Walter's house;
      His true wife shed no tear;
    She lay upon her bed as mute
      As the earl did on his bier:
    Till--'Ride, ride fast,' she said at last,
      'And bring the avenged's son anear!
    Ride fast, ride free, as a dart can flee,
    For white of blee with waiting for me
      Is the corse in the next chambere.'

    XXI.

    "I came, I knelt beside her bed;
      Her calm was worse than strife:
    'My husband, for thy father dear,
    Gave freely when thou wast not here
      His own and eke my life.
    A boon! Of that sweet child we make
    An orphan for thy father's sake,
      Make thou, for ours, a wife.'

    XXII.

    "I said, 'My steed neighs in the court,
      My bark rocks on the brine,
    And the warrior's vow I am under now
      To free the pilgrim's shrine;
    But fetch the ring and fetch the priest
      And call that daughter of thine,
    And rule she wide from my castle on Nyde
      While I am in Palestine.'

    XXIII.

    "In the dark chambere, if the bride was fair,
      Ye wis, I could not see,
    But the steed thrice neighed, and the priest fast prayed,
      And wedded fast were we.
    Her mother smiled upon her bed
    As at its side we knelt to wed,
      And the bride rose from her knee
    And kissed the smile of her mother dead,
      Or ever she kissed me.

    XXIV.

    "My page, my page, what grieves thee so,
      That the tears run down thy face?"--
    "Alas, alas! mine own sister
      Was in thy lady's case:
    But _she_ laid down the silks she wore
    And followed him she wed before,
    Disguised as his true servitor,
      To the very battle-place."

    XXV.

    And wept the page, but laughed the knight,
      A careless laugh laughed he:
    "Well done it were for thy sister,
      But not for my ladye!
    My love, so please you, shall requite
    No woman, whether dark or bright,
      Unwomaned if she be."

    XXVI.

    The page stopped weeping and smiled cold--
      "Your wisdom may declare
    That womanhood is proved the best
    By golden brooch and glossy vest
      The mincing ladies wear;
    Yet is it proved, and was of old,
    Anear as well, I dare to hold,
      By truth, or by despair."

    XXVII.

    He smiled no more, he wept no more,
      But passionate he spake--
    "Oh, womanly she prayed in tent,
      When none beside did wake!
    Oh, womanly she paled in fight,
      For one beloved's sake!--
    And her little hand, defiled with blood,
    Her tender tears of womanhood
      Most woman-pure did make!"

    XXVIII.

    --"Well done it were for thy sister,
      Thou tellest well her tale!
    But for my lady, she shall pray
      I' the kirk of Nydesdale.
    Not dread for me but love for me
      Shall make my lady pale;
    No casque shall hide her woman's tear--
    It shall have room to trickle clear
      Behind her woman's veil."

    XXIX.

    --"But what if she mistook thy mind
      And followed thee to strife,
    Then kneeling did entreat thy love
      As Paynims ask for life?"
    --"I would forgive, and evermore
    Would love her as my servitor,
      But little as my wife.

    XXX.

    "Look up--there is a small bright cloud
      Alone amid the skies!
    So high, so pure, and so apart,
      A woman's honour lies."
    The page looked up--the cloud was sheen--
    A sadder cloud did rush, I ween,
      Betwixt it and his eyes.

    XXXI.

    Then dimly dropped his eyes away
      From welkin unto hill--
    Ha! who rides there?--the page is 'ware,
      Though the cry at his heart is still:
    And the page seeth all and the knight seeth none,
    Though banner and spear do fleck the sun,
      And the Saracens ride at will.

    XXXII.

    He speaketh calm, he speaketh low,--
      "Ride fast, my master, ride,
    Or ere within the broadening dark
      The narrow shadows hide."
    "Yea, fast, my page, I will do so,
      And keep thou at my side."

    XXXIII.

    "Now nay, now nay, ride on thy way,
      Thy faithful page precede.
    For I must loose on saddle-bow
    My battle-casque that galls, I trow,
      The shoulder of my steed;
    And I must pray, as I did vow,
      For one in bitter need.

    XXXIV.

    "Ere night I shall be near to thee,--
      Now ride, my master, ride!
    Ere night, as parted spirits cleave
    To mortals too beloved to leave,
      I shall be at thy side."
    The knight smiled free at the fantasy,
      And adown the dell did ride.

    XXXV.

    Had the knight looked up to the page's face,
      No smile the word had won;
    Had the knight looked up to the page's face,
      I ween he had never gone:
    Had the knight looked back to the page's geste,
      I ween he had turned anon,
    For dread was the woe in the face so young,
    And wild was the silent geste that flung
    Casque, sword to earth, as the boy down-sprung
      And stood--alone, alone.

    XXXVI.

    He clenched his hands as if to hold
      His soul's great agony--
    "Have I renounced my womanhood,
      For wifehood unto _thee_,
    And is this the last, last look of thine
      That ever I shall see?

    XXXVII.

    "Yet God thee save, and mayst thou have
      A lady to thy mind,
    More woman-proud and half as true
      As one thou leav'st behind!
    And God me take with HIM to dwell--
    For HIM I cannot love too well,
      As I have loved my kind."

    XXXVIII.

    She looketh up, in earth's despair,
      The hopeful heavens to seek;
    That little cloud still floateth there,
      Whereof her loved did speak:
    How bright the little cloud appears!
    Her eyelids fall upon the tears,
      And the tears down either cheek.

    XXXIX.

    The tramp of hoof, the flash of steel--
      The Paynims round her coming!
    The sound and sight have made her calm,--
      False page, but truthful woman;
    She stands amid them all unmoved:
    A heart once broken by the loved
      Is strong to meet the foeman.

    XL.

    "Ho, Christian page! art keeping sheep,
      From pouring wine-cups resting?"--
    "I keep my master's noble name,
      For warring, not for feasting;
    And if that here Sir Hubert were,
    My master brave, my master dear,
      Ye would not stay the questing."

    XLI.

    "Where is thy master, scornful page,
      That we may slay or bind him?"--
    "Now search the lea and search the wood,
      And see if ye can find him!
    Nathless, as hath been often tried,
    Your Paynim heroes faster ride
      Before him than behind him."

    XLII.

    "Give smoother answers, lying page,
      Or perish in the lying!"--
    "I trow that if the warrior brand
    Beside my foot, were in my hand,
      'T were better at replying!"
    They cursed her deep, they smote her low,
    They cleft her golden ringlets through;
      The Loving is the Dying.

    XLIII.

    She felt the scimitar gleam down,
      And met it from beneath
    With smile more bright in victory
      Than any sword from sheath,--
    Which flashed across her lip serene,
    Most like the spirit-light between
      The darks of life and death.

    XLIV.

      _Ingemisco, ingemisco!_
    From the convent on the sea,
    Now it sweepeth solemnly,
    As over wood and over lea
    Bodily the wind did carry
    The great altar of St. Mary,
    And the fifty tapers paling o'er it,
    And the Lady Abbess stark before it,
    And the weary nuns with hearts that faintly
    Beat along their voices saintly--
      _Ingemisco, ingemisco!_
    Dirge for abbess laid in shroud
    Sweepeth o'er the shroudless dead,
    Page or lady, as we said,
    With the dews upon her head,
    All as sad if not as loud.
      _Ingemisco, ingemisco!_
    Is ever a lament begun
    By any mourner under sun,
    Which, ere it endeth, suits but _one_?




_THE LAY OF THE BROWN ROSARY._


FIRST PART.


    I.

    "Onora, Onora,"--her mother is calling,
    She sits at the lattice and hears the dew falling
    Drop after drop from the sycamores laden
    With dew as with blossom, and calls home the maiden,
          "Night cometh, Onora."

    II.

    She looks down the garden-walk caverned with trees,
    To the limes at the end where the green arbour is--
    "Some sweet thought or other may keep where it found her,
    While, forgot or unseen in the dreamlight around her,
          Night cometh--Onora!"

    III.

    She looks up the forest whose alleys shoot on
    Like the mute minster-aisles when the anthem is done
    And the choristers sitting with faces aslant
    Feel the silence to consecrate more than the chant--
          "Onora, Onora!"

    IV.

    And forward she looketh across the brown heath--
    "Onora, art coming?"--what is it she seeth?
    Nought, nought but the grey border-stone that is wist
    To dilate and assume a wild shape in the mist--
          "My daughter!" Then over

    V.

    The casement she leaneth, and as she doth so
    She is 'ware of her little son playing below:
    "Now where is Onora?" He hung down his head
    And spake not, then answering blushed scarlet-red,--
          "At the tryst with her lover."

    VI.

    But his mother was wroth: in a sternness quoth she,
    "As thou play'st at the ball art thou playing with me?
    When we know that her lover to battle is gone,
    And the saints know above that she loveth but one
          And will ne'er wed another?"

    VII.

    Then the boy wept aloud; 't was a fair sight yet sad
    To see the tears run down the sweet blooms he had:
    He stamped with his foot, said--"The saints know I lied
    Because truth that is wicked is fittest to hide:
          Must I utter it, mother?"

    VIII.

    In his vehement childhood he hurried within
    And knelt at her feet as in prayer against sin,
    But a child at a prayer never sobbeth as he--
    "Oh! she sits with the nun of the brown rosary,
          At nights in the ruin--

    IX.

    "The old convent ruin the ivy rots off,
    Where the owl hoots by day and the toad is sun-proof,
    Where no singing-birds build and the trees gaunt and grey
    As in stormy sea-coasts appear blasted one way--
          But is _this_ the wind's doing?

    X.

    "A nun in the east wall was buried alive
    Who mocked at the priest when he called her to shrive,
    And shrieked such a curse, as the stone took her breath,
    The old abbess fell backwards and swooned unto death
          With an Ave half-spoken.

    XI.

    "I tried once to pass it, myself and my hound,
    Till, as fearing the lash, down he shivered to ground--
    A brave hound, my mother! a brave hound, ye wot!
    And the wolf thought the same with his fangs at her throat
          In the pass of the Brocken.

    XII.

    "At dawn and at eve, mother, who sitteth there
    With the brown rosary never used for a prayer?
    Stoop low, mother, low! If we went there to see,
    What an ugly great hole in that east wall must be
          At dawn and at even!

    XIII.

    "Who meet there, my mother, at dawn and at even?
    Who meet by that wall, never looking to heaven?
    O sweetest my sister, what doeth with _thee_
    The ghost of a nun with a brown rosary
          And a face turned from heaven?

    XIV.

    "Saint Agnes o'erwatcheth my dreams and erewhile
    I have felt through mine eyelids the warmth of her smile;
    But last night, as a sadness like pity came o'er her,
    She whispered--'Say _two_ prayers at dawn for Onora:
          The Tempted is sinning.'"

    XV.

    "Onora, Onora!" they heard her not coming,
    Not a step on the grass, not a voice through the gloaming;
    But her mother looked up, and she stood on the floor
    Fair and still as the moonlight that came there before,
          And a smile just beginning:

    XVI.

    It touches her lips but it dares not arise
    To the height of the mystical sphere of her eyes,
    And the large musing eyes, neither joyous nor sorry
    Sing on like the angels in separate glory
          Between clouds of amber;

    XVII.

    For the hair droops in clouds amber-coloured till stirred
    Into gold by the gesture that comes with a word;
    While--O soft!--her speaking is so interwound
    Of the dim and the sweet, 't is a twilight of sound
          And floats through the chamber.

    XVIII.

    "Since thou shrivest my brother, fair mother," said she
    "I count on thy priesthood for marrying of me,
    And I know by the hills that the battle is done.
    That my lover rides on, will be here with the sun,
          'Neath the eyes that behold thee."

    XIX.

    Her mother sat silent--too tender, I wis,
    Of the smile her dead father smiled dying to kiss:
    But the boy started up pale with tears, passion-wrought--
    "O wicked fair sister, the hills utter nought!
          If he cometh, who told thee?"

    XX.

    "I know by the hills," she resumed calm and clear,
    "By the beauty upon them, that HE is anear:
    Did they ever look _so_ since he bade me adieu?
    Oh, love in the waking, sweet brother, is true,
          As Saint Agnes in sleeping!"

    XXI.

    Half-ashamed and half-softened the boy did not speak,
    And the blush met the lashes which fell on his cheek:
    She bowed down to kiss him: dear saints, did he see
    Or feel on her bosom the BROWN ROSARY,
          That he shrank away weeping?


SECOND PART.

_A bed._ ONORA, _sleeping._ Angels, _but not near._


_First Angel._

    Must we stand so far, and she
    So very fair?

_Second Angel._

            As bodies be.

_First Angel._

    And she so mild?

_Second Angel._

                    As spirits when
    They meeken, not to God, but men.

_First Angel._

    And she so young, that I who bring
      Good dreams for saintly children, might
      Mistake that small soft face to-night,
    And fetch her such a blessed thing
  That at her waking she would weep
    For childhood lost anew in sleep.
    How hath she sinned?

_Second Angel._

                      In bartering love;
    God's love for man's.

_First Angel._

                           We may reprove
    The world for this, not only her:
    Let me approach to breathe away
    This dust o' the heart with holy air.

_Second Angel._

    Stand off! She sleeps, and did not pray.

_First Angel._

    Did none pray for her?

_Second Angel._

                           Ay, a child,--
    Who never, praying, wept before:
    While, in a mother undefiled,
    Prayer goeth on in sleep, as true
    And pauseless as the pulses do.

_First Angel._

    Then I approach.

_Second Angel._

                       It is not WILLED.

_First Angel._

    One word: is she redeemed?

_Second Angel._

                                No more!
    The place is filled.            [Angels _vanish_

_Evil Spirit (in a Nun's garb by the bed)._

    Forbear that dream--forbear that dream! too near to heaven it leaned.

_Onora (in sleep)._

    Nay, leave me this--but only this! 't is but a dream, sweet fiend!

_Evil Spirit._

    It is a _thought_.

_Onora (in sleep)._

                    A sleeping thought--most innocent of good:
    It doth the Devil no harm, sweet fiend! it cannot if it would.
    I say in it no holy hymn, I do no holy work,
    I scarcely hear the sabbath-bell that chimeth from the kirk.

_Evil Spirit._

    Forbear that dream--forbear that dream!

_Onora (in sleep)._

          Nay, let me dream at least.
    That far-off bell, it may be took for viol at a feast:
    I only walk among the fields, beneath the autumn-sun,
    With my dead father, hand in hand, as I have often done.

_Evil Spirit._

    Forbear that dream--forbear that dream!

_Onora (in sleep)._

             Nay, sweet fiend, let me go:
    I never more can walk with _him_, oh, never more but so!
    For they have tied my father's feet beneath the kirk-yard stone,
    Oh, deep and straight! oh, very straight! they move at nights alone:
    And then he calleth through my dreams, he calleth tenderly,
    "Come forth, my daughter, my beloved, and walk the fields with me!"

_Evil Spirit._

    Forbear that dream, or else disprove its pureness by a sign.

_Onora (in sleep)._

    Speak on, thou shalt be satisfied, my word shall answer thine.
    I heard a bird which used to sing when I a child was praying,
    I see the poppies in the corn I used to sport away in:
    What shall I do--tread down the dew and pull the blossoms blowing?
    Or clap my wicked hands to fright the finches from the rowan?

_Evil Spirit._

    Thou shalt do something harder still. Stand up where thou dost stand
    Among the fields of Dreamland with thy father hand in hand,
    And clear and slow repeat the vow, declare its cause and kind,
    Which not to break, in sleep or wake thou bearest on thy mind.

_Onora (in sleep)._

    I bear a vow of sinful kind, a vow for mournful cause;
    I vowed it deep, I vowed it strong, the spirits laughed applause:
    The spirits trailed along the pines low laughter like a breeze,
    While, high atween their swinging tops, the stars appeared to freeze.

_Evil Spirit._

    More calm and free, speak out to me why such a vow was made.

_Onora (in sleep)._

    Because that God decreed my death and I shrank back afraid.
    Have patience, O dead father mine! I did not fear to die--
    I wish I were a young dead child and had thy company!
    I wish I lay beside thy feet, a buried three-year child,
    And wearing only a kiss of thine upon my lips that smiled!
    The linden-tree that covers thee might so have shadowed twain,
    For death itself I did not fear--'t is love that makes the pain:
    Love feareth death. I was no child, I was betrothed that day;
    I wore a troth-kiss on my lips I could not give away.
    How could I bear to lie content and still beneath a stone,
    And feel mine own betrothed go by--alas! no more mine own--
    Go leading by in wedding pomp some lovely lady brave,
    With cheeks that blushed as red as rose, while mine were white in
        grave?
    How could I bear to sit in heaven, on e'er so high a throne,
    And hear him say to her--to _her_! that else he loveth none?
    Though e'er so high I sate above, though e'er so low he spake,
    As clear as thunder I should hear the new oath he might take,
    That hers, forsooth, were heavenly eyes--ah me, while very dim
    Some heavenly eyes (indeed of heaven!) would darken down to _him_!

_Evil Spirit._

    Who told thee thou wast called to death?

_Onora (in sleep)._

                                      I sate all night beside thee:
    The grey owl on the ruined wall shut both his eyes to hide thee,
    And ever he flapped his heavy wing all brokenly and weak,
    And the long grass waved against the sky, around his gasping beak.
    I sate beside thee all the night, while the moonlight lay forlorn
    Strewn round us like a dead world's shroud in ghastly fragments torn:
    And through the night, and through the hush, and over the flapping
        wing,
    We heard beside the Heavenly Gate the angels murmuring:
    We heard them say, "Put day to day, and count the days to seven,
    And God will draw Onora up the golden stairs of heaven.
    And yet the Evil ones have leave that purpose to defer,
    For if she has no need of HIM, He has no need of her."

_Evil Spirit._

    Speak out to me, speak bold and free.

_Onora (in sleep)._

                           And then I heard thee say--
    "I count upon my rosary brown the hours thou hast to stay!
    Yet God permits us Evil ones to put by that decree,
    Since if thou hast no need of HIM, He has no need of thee:
    And if thou wilt forgo the sight of angels, verily
    Thy true love gazing on thy face shall guess what angels be;
    Nor bride shall pass, save thee" ... Alas!--my father's hand's a-cold,
    The meadows seem ...

_Evil Spirit._

                        Forbear the dream, or let the vow be told.

_Onora (in sleep)._

    I vowed upon thy rosary brown, this string of antique beads,
    By charnel lichens overgrown, and dank among the weeds,
    This rosary brown which is thine own,--lost soul of buried nun!
    Who, lost by vow, wouldst render now all souls alike undone,--
    I vowed upon thy rosary brown,--and, till such vow should break,
    A pledge always of living days 't was hung around my neck--
    I vowed to thee on rosary (dead father, look not so!),
    _I would not thank God in my weal, nor seek God in my woe._

_Evil Spirit._

    And canst thou prove ...

_Onora (in sleep)._

                          O love, my love! I felt him near again!
    I saw his steed on mountain-head, I heard it on the plain!
    Was this no weal for me to feel? Is greater weal than this?
    Yet when he came, I wept his name--and the angels heard but _his_.

_Evil Spirit._

    Well done, well done!

_Onora (in sleep)._

            Ah me, the sun! the dreamlight 'gins to pine,--
    Ah me, how dread can look the Dead! Aroint thee, father mine!

    She starteth from slumber, she sitteth upright,
    And her breath comes in sobs, while she stares through the night;
    There is nought; the great willow, her lattice before,
    Large-drawn in the moon, lieth calm on the floor:
    But her hands tremble fast as their pulses and, free
    From the death-clasp, close over--the BROWN ROSARY.


THIRD PART.


    I.

    'Tis a morn for a bridal; the merry bride-bell
    Rings clear through the green-wood that skirts the chapelle,
    And the priest at the altar awaiteth the bride,
    And the sacristans slyly are jesting aside
            At the work shall be doing;

    II.

    While down through the wood rides that fair company,
    The youths with the courtship, the maids with the glee,
    Till the chapel-cross opens to sight, and at once
    All the maids sigh demurely and think for the nonce,
            "And so endeth a wooing!"

    III.

    And the bride and the bridegroom are leading the way,
    With his hand on her rein, and a word yet to say;
    Her dropt eyelids suggest the soft answers beneath,
    And the little quick smiles come and go with her breath
            When she sigheth or speaketh.

    IV.

    And the tender bride-mother breaks off unaware
    From an Ave, to think that her daughter is fair,
    Till in nearing the chapel and glancing before,
    She seeth her little son stand at the door:
            Is it play that he seeketh?

    V.

    Is it play, when his eyes wander innocent-wild
    And sublimed with a sadness unfitting a child?
    He trembles not, weeps not; the passion is done,
    And calmly he kneels in their midst, with the sun
            On his head like a glory.

    VI.

    "O fair-featured maids, ye are many!" he cried,
    "But in fairness and vileness who matcheth the bride?
    O brave-hearted youths, ye are many! but whom
    For the courage and woe can ye match with the groom
            As ye see them before ye?"

    VII.

    Out spake the bride's mother, "The vileness is thine
    If thou shame thine own sister, a bride at the shrine!"
    Out spake the bride's lover, "The vileness be mine
    If he shame mine own wife at the hearth or the shrine
            And the charge be unproved.

    VIII.

    "Bring the charge, prove the charge, brother! speak it aloud:
    Let thy father and hers hear it deep in his shroud!"
    --"O father, thou seest, for dead eyes can see,
    How she wears on her bosom a BROWN ROSARY,
            O my father beloved!"

    IX.

    Then outlaughed the bridegroom, and outlaughed withal
    Both maidens and youths by the old chapel-wall:
    "So she weareth no love-gift, kind brother," quoth he,
    "She may wear an she listeth a brown rosary,
            Like a pure-hearted lady."

    X.

    Then swept through the chapel the long bridal train;
    Though he spake to the bride she replied not again:
    On, as one in a dream, pale and stately she went
    Where the altar-lights burn o'er the great sacrament,
            Faint with daylight, but steady.

    XI.

    But her brother had passed in between them and her,
    And calmly knelt down on the high-altar stair--
    Of an infantine aspect so stern to the view
    That the priest could not smile on the child's eyes of blue
            As he would for another.

    XII.

    He knelt like a child marble-sculptured and white
    That seems kneeling to pray on the tomb of a knight,
    With a look taken up to each iris of stone
    From the greatness and death where he kneeleth, but none
            From the face of a mother.

    XIII.

    "In your chapel, O priest, ye have wedded and shriven
    Fair wives for the hearth, and fair sinners for heaven;
    But this fairest my sister, ye think now to wed,
    Bid her kneel where she standeth, and shrive her instead:
            O shrive her and wed not!"

    XIV.

    In tears, the bride's mother,--"Sir priest, unto thee
    Would he lie, as he lied to this fair company."
    In wrath, the bride's lover,--"The lie shall be clear!
    Speak it out, boy! the saints in their niches shall hear:
            Be the charge proved or said not!"

    XV.

    Then serene in his childhood he lifted his face,
    And his voice sounded holy and fit for the place,--
    "Look down from your niches, ye still saints, and see
    How she wears on her bosom a BROWN ROSARY!
            Is it used for the praying?"

    XVI.

    The youths looked aside--to laugh there were a sin--
    And the maidens' lips trembled from smiles shut within.
    Quoth the priest, "Thou art wild, pretty boy! Blessed she
    Who prefers at her bridal a brown rosary
            To a worldly arraying."

    XVII.

    The bridegroom spake low and led onward the bride
    And before the high altar they stood side by side:
    The rite-book is opened, the rite is begun,
    They have knelt down together to rise up as one.
            Who laughed by the altar?

    XVIII.

    The maidens looked forward, the youths looked around,
    The bridegroom's eye flashed from his prayer at the sound;
    And each saw the bride, as if no bride she were,
    Gazing cold at the priest without gesture of prayer,
            As he read from the psalter.

    XIX.

    The priest never knew that she did so, but still
    He felt a power on him too strong for his will:
    And whenever the Great Name was there to be read,
    His voice sank to silence--THAT could not be said,
            Or the air could not hold it.

    XX.

    "I have sinned," quoth he, "I have sinned, I wot"--
    And the tears ran adown his old cheeks at the thought:
    They dropped fast on the book, but he read on the same,
    And aye was the silence where should be the NAME,--
            As the choristers told it.

    XXI.

    The rite-book is closed, and the rite being done
    They, who knelt down together, arise up as one:
    Fair riseth the bride--Oh, a fair bride is she,
    But, for all (think the maidens) that brown rosary,
            No saint at her praying!

    XXII.

    What aileth the bridegroom? He glares blank and wide;
    Then suddenly turning he kisseth the bride;
    His lips stung her with cold; she glanced upwardly mute:
    "Mine own wife," he said, and fell stark at her foot
            In the word he was saying.

    XXIII.

    They have lifted him up, but his head sinks away,
    And his face showeth bleak in the sunshine and grey.
    Leave him now where he lieth--for oh, never more
    Will he kneel at an altar or stand on a floor!
            Let his bride gaze upon him.

    XXIV.

    Long and still was her gaze while they chafed him there
    And breathed in the mouth whose last life had kissed her,
    But when they stood up--only _they_! with a start
    The shriek from her soul struck her pale lips apart:
            She has lived, and forgone him!

    XXV.

    And low on his body she droppeth adown--
    "Didst call me thine own wife, beloved--thine own?
    Then take thine own with thee! thy coldness is warm
    To the world's cold without thee! Come, keep me from harm
            In a calm of thy teaching!"

    XXVI.

    She looked in his face earnest-long, as in sooth
    There were hope of an answer, and then kissed his mouth,
    And with head on his bosom, wept, wept bitterly,--
    "Now, O God, take pity--take pity on me!
            God, hear my beseeching!"

    XXVII.

    She was 'ware of a shadow that crossed where she lay,
    She was 'ware of a presence that withered the day:
    Wild she sprang to her feet,--"I surrender to _thee_
    The broken vow's pledge, the accursed rosary,--
            I am ready for dying!"

    XXVIII.

    She dashed it in scorn to the marble-paved ground
    Where it fell mute as snow, and a weird music-sound
    Crept up, like a chill, up the aisles long and dim,--
    As the fiends tried to mock at the choristers' hymn
            And moaned in the trying.


FOURTH PART.


    Onora looketh listlessly adown the garden walk:
    "I am weary, O my mother, of thy tender talk.
    I am weary of the trees a-waving to and fro,
    Of the steadfast skies above, the running brooks below.
    All things are the same, but I,--only I am dreary,
    And, mother, of my dreariness behold me very weary.

    "Mother, brother, pull the flowers I planted in the spring
    And smiled to think I should smile more upon their gathering:
    The bees will find out other flowers--oh, pull them, dearest mine,
    And carry them and carry me before Saint Agnes' shrine."
    --Whereat they pulled the summer flowers she planted in the spring,
    And her and them all mournfully to Agnes' shrine did bring.

    She looked up to the pictured saint and gently shook her head--
    "The picture is too calm for _me_--too calm for _me_," she said:
    "The little flowers we brought with us, before it we may lay,
    For those are used to look at heaven,--but _I_ must turn away,
    Because no sinner under sun can dare or bear to gaze
    On God's or angel's holiness, except in Jesu's face."

    She spoke with passion after pause--"And were it wisely done
    If we who cannot gaze above, should walk the earth alone?
    If we whose virtue is so weak should have a will so strong,
    And stand blind on the rocks to choose the right path from the wrong?
    To choose perhaps a love-lit hearth, instead of love and heaven,--
    A single rose, for a rose-tree which beareth seven times seven?
    A rose that droppeth from the hand, that fadeth in the breast,--
    Until, in grieving for the worst, we learn what is the best!"

    Then breaking into tears,--"Dear God," she cried, "and must we see
    All blissful things depart from us or ere we go to THEE?
    We cannot guess Thee in the wood or hear Thee in the wind?
    Our cedars must fall round us ere we see the light behind?
    Ay sooth, we feel too strong, in weal, to need thee on that road,
    But woe being come, the soul is dumb that crieth not on 'God.'"

    Her mother could not speak for tears; she ever mused thus,
    "_The bees will find out other flowers_,--but what is left for _us_?"
    But her young brother stayed his sobs and knelt beside her knee,
    --"Thou sweetest sister in the world, hast never a word for me?"
    She passed her hand across his face, she pressed it on his cheek,
    So tenderly, so tenderly--she needed not to speak.

    The wreath which lay on shrine that day, at vespers bloomed no more.
    The woman fair who placed it there had died an hour before.
    Both perished mute for lack of root, earth's nourishment to reach.
    O reader, breathe (the ballad saith) some sweetness out of each!




_A ROMANCE OF THE GANGES._


    I.

    Seven maidens 'neath the midnight
      Stand near the river-sea
    Whose water sweepeth white around
      The shadow of the tree;
    The moon and earth are face to face,
      And earth is slumbering deep;
    The wave-voice seems the voice of dreams
      That wander through her sleep:
                        The river floweth on.

    II.

    What bring they 'neath the midnight,
      Beside the river-sea?
    They bring the human heart wherein
      No nightly calm can be,--
    That droppeth never with the wind,
      Nor drieth with the dew:
    Oh, calm in God! thy calm is broad
      To cover spirits too.
                        The river floweth on.

    III.

    The maidens lean them over
      The waters, side by side,
    And shun each other's deepening eyes,
      And gaze adown the tide;
    For each within a little boat
      A little lamp hath put,
    And heaped for freight some lily's weight
      Or scarlet rose half shut.
                        The river floweth on.

    IV.

    Of shell of cocoa carven
      Each little boat is made;
    Each carries a lamp, and carries a flower,
      And carries a hope unsaid;
    And when the boat hath carried the lamp
      Unquenched till out of sight,
    The maiden is sure that love will endure;
      But love will fail with light.
                        The river floweth on.

    V.

    Why, all the stars are ready
      To symbolize the soul,
    The stars untroubled by the wind,
      Unwearied as they roll;
    And yet the soul by instinct sad
      Reverts to symbols low--
    To that small flame, whose very name
      Breathed o'er it, shakes it so!
                        The river floweth on.

    VI.

    Six boats are on the river,
      Seven maidens on the shore,
    While still above them steadfastly
      The stars shine evermore.
    Go, little boats, go soft and safe,
      And guard the symbol spark!
    The boats aright go safe and bright
      Across the waters dark.
                        The river floweth on.

    VII.

    The maiden Luti watcheth
      Where onwardly they float:
    That look in her dilating eyes
      Might seem to drive her boat:
    Her eyes still mark the constant fire,
      And kindling unawares
    That hopeful while, she lets a smile
      Creep silent through her prayers.
                        The river floweth on.

    VIII.

    The smile--where hath it wandered?
      She riseth from her knee,
    She holds her dark, wet locks away--
      There is no light to see!
    She cries a quick and bitter cry--
      "Nuleeni, launch me thine!
    We must have light abroad to-night,
      For all the wreck of mine."
                        The river floweth on.

    IX.

    "I do remember watching
      Beside this river-bed
    When on my childish knee was leaned
      My dying father's head;
    I turned mine own to keep the tears
      From falling on his face:
    What doth it prove when Death and Love
      Choose out the self-same place?"
                        The river floweth on.

    X.

    "They say the dead are joyful
      The death-change here receiving:
    Who say--ah me! who dare to say
      Where joy comes to the living?
    Thy boat, Nuleeni! look not sad--
      Light up the waters rather!
    I weep no faithless lover where
      I wept a loving father."
                        The river floweth on.

    XI.

    "My heart foretold his falsehood
      Ere my little boat grew dim;
    And though I closed mine eyes to dream
      That one last dream of _him_,
    They shall not now be wet to see
      The shining vision go:
    From earth's cold love I look above
      To the holy house of snow."[2]
                        The river floweth on.

    XII.

    "Come thou--thou never knewest
      A grief, that thou shouldst fear one!
    Thou wearest still the happy look
      That shines beneath a dear one:
    Thy humming-bird is in the sun,[3]
      Thy cuckoo in the grove,
    And all the three broad worlds, for thee
      Are full of wandering love."
                        The river floweth on.

    XIII.

    "Why, maiden, dost thou loiter?
      What secret wouldst thou cover?
    That peepul cannot hide thy boat,
      And I can guess thy lover;
    I heard thee sob his name in sleep,
      It was a name I knew:
    Come, little maid, be not afraid,
      But let us prove him true!"
                        The river floweth on.

    XIV.

    The little maiden cometh,
      She cometh shy and slow;
    I ween she seeth through her lids
      They drop adown so low:
    Her tresses meet her small bare feet,
      She stands and speaketh nought,
    Yet blusheth red as if she said
      The name she only thought.
                        The river floweth on.

    XV.

    She knelt beside the water,
      She lighted up the flame,
    And o'er her youthful forehead's calm
      The fitful radiance came:--
    "Go, little boat, go soft and safe,
      And guard the symbol spark!"
    Soft, safe doth float the little boat
      Across the waters dark.
                        The river floweth on.

    XVI.

    Glad tears her eyes have blinded,
      The light they cannot reach;
    She turneth with that sudden smile
      She learnt before her speech--
    "I do not hear his voice, the tears
      Have dimmed my light away,
    But the symbol light will last to-night,
      The love will last for aye!"
                        The river floweth on.

    XVII.

    Then Luti spake behind her,
      Outspake she bitterly--
    "By the symbol light that lasts to-night,
      Wilt vow a vow to me?"
    Nuleeni gazeth up her face,
      Soft answer maketh she--
    "By loves that last when lights are past,
      I vow that vow to thee!"
                        The river floweth on.

    XVIII.

    An earthly look had Luti
      Though her voice was deep as prayer--
    "The rice is gathered from the plains
      To cast upon thine hair:[4]
    But when _he_ comes his marriage-band
      Around thy neck to throw,
    Thy bride-smile raise to meet his gaze,
    And whisper,--_There is one betrays,
      While Luti suffers woe._"
                        The river floweth on.

    XIX.

    "And when in seasons after,
      Thy little bright-faced son
    Shall lean against thy knee and ask
      What deeds his sire hath done,--
    Press deeper down thy mother-smile
      His glossy curls among,
    View deep his pretty childish eyes,
    And whisper,--_There is none denies,
      While Luti speaks of wrong._"
                        The river floweth on.

    XX.

    Nuleeni looked in wonder,
      Yet softly answered she--
    "By loves that last when lights are past,
      I vowed that vow to thee:
    But why glads it thee that a bride-day be
      By a word of _woe_ defiled?
    That a word of _wrong_ take the cradle-song
      From the ear of a sinless child?"
    "Why?" Luti said, and her laugh was dread,
      And her eyes dilated wild--
    "That the fair new love may her bridegroom prove,
      And the father shame the child!"
                        The river floweth on.

    XXI.

    "Thou flowest still, O river,
      Thou flowest 'neath the moon;
    Thy lily hath not changed a leaf,[5]
      Thy charmed lute a tune:
    _He_ mixed his voice with thine and _his_
      Was all I heard around;
    But now, beside his chosen bride,
      I hear the river's sound."
                        The river floweth on.

    XXII.

    "I gaze upon her beauty
      Through the tresses that enwreathe it;
    The light above thy wave, is hers--
      My rest, alone beneath it:
    Oh, give me back the dying look
      My father gave thy water!
    Give back--and let a little love
      O'erwatch his weary daughter!"
                        The river floweth on.

    XXIII.

    "Give back!" she hath departed--
      The word is wandering with her;
    And the stricken maidens hear afar
      The step and cry together.
    Frail symbols? None are frail enow
      For mortal joys to borrow!--
    While bright doth float Nuleeni's boat,
      She weepeth dark with sorrow.
                        The river floweth on.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] The Hindoo heaven is localized on the summit of Mount Meru--one of
the mountains of Himalaya or Himmaleh, which signifies, I believe, in
Sanscrit, the abode of snow, winter, or coldness.

[3] Himadeva, the Indian god of love, is imagined to wander through
the three worlds, accompanied by the humming-bird, cuckoo, and gentle
breezes.

[4] The casting of rice upon the head, and the fixing of the band or
tali about the neck, are parts of the Hindoo marriage ceremonial.

[5] The Ganges is represented as a white woman, with a water-lily in
her right hand, and in her left a lute.




_RHYME OF THE DUCHESS MAY._


    I.

    To the belfry, one by one, went the ringers from the sun,
                          _Toll slowly._
    And the oldest ringer said, "Ours is music for the dead
              When the rebecks are all done."

    II.

    Six abeles i' the churchyard grow on the north side in a row,
                          _Toll slowly._
    And the shadows of their tops rock across the little slopes
              Of the grassy graves below.

    III.

    On the south side and the west a small river runs in haste,
                          _Toll slowly._
    And, between the river flowing and the fair green trees a-growing,
              Do the dead lie at their rest.

    IV.

    On the east I sate that day, up against a willow grey:
                          _Toll slowly._
    Through the rain of willow-branches I could see the low hill-ranges
              And the river on its way.

    V.

    There I sate beneath the tree, and the bell tolled solemnly,
                          _Toll slowly._
    While the trees' and river's voices flowed between the solemn noises,--
              Yet death seemed more loud to me.

    VI.

    There I read this ancient rhyme while the bell did all the time
                          _Toll slowly._
    And the solemn knell fell in with the tale of life and sin,
              Like a rhythmic fate sublime.


THE RHYME.


    I.

    Broad the forests stood (I read) on the hills of Linteged,
                          _Toll slowly._
    And three hundred years had stood mute adown each hoary wood,
              Like a full heart having prayed.

    II.

    And the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west,
                          _Toll slowly._
    And but little thought was theirs of the silent antique years,
              In the building of their nest.

    III.

    Down the sun dropt large and red on the towers of Linteged,--
                          _Toll slowly._
    Lance and spear upon the height, bristling strange in fiery light,
              While the castle stood in shade.

    IV.

    There the castle stood up black with the red sun at its back--
                          _Toll slowly_--
    Like a sullen smouldering pyre with a top that flickers fire
              When the wind is on its track.

    V.

    And five hundred archers tall did besiege the castle wall--
                          _Toll slowly._
    And the castle, seethed in blood, fourteen days and nights had stood
              And to-night was near its fall.

    VI.

    Yet thereunto, blind to doom, three months since, a bride did come--
                          _Toll slowly._
    One who proudly trod the floors and softly whispered in the doors,
              "May good angels bless our home."

    VII.

    Oh, a bride of queenly eyes, with a front of constancies:
                          _Toll slowly._
    Oh, a bride of cordial mouth where the untired smile of youth
              Did light outward its own sighs!

    VIII.

    'T was a Duke's fair orphan-girl, and her uncle's ward--the Earl--
                          _Toll slowly._
    Who betrothed her twelve years old, for the sake of dowry gold,
              To his son Lord Leigh the churl.

    IX.

    But what time she had made good all her years of womanhood--
                          _Toll slowly._
    Unto both these lords of Leigh spake she out right sovranly,
              "My will runneth as my blood.

    X.

    "And while this same blood makes red this same right hand's veins,"
        she said--
                        _Toll slowly_--
    "'T is my will, as lady free, not to wed a lord of Leigh,
                    But Sir Guy of Linteged."

    XI.

    The old Earl he smiled smooth, then he sighed for wilful youth--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Good my niece, that hand withal looketh somewhat soft and small
                    For so large a will, in sooth."

    XII.

    She too smiled by that same sign, but her smile was cold and fine--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Little hand clasps muckle gold, or it were not worth the hold
                    Of thy son, good uncle mine!"

    XIII.

    Then the young lord jerked his breath, and sware thickly in his teeth--
                        _Toll slowly_--
    "He would wed his own betrothed, an she loved him an she loathed,
                    Let the life come or the death."

    XIV.

    Up she rose with scornful eyes, as her father's child might rise--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Thy hound's blood, my lord of Leigh, stains thy knightly heel,"
        quoth she,
                    "And he moans not where he lies:

    XV.

    "But a woman's will dies hard, in the hall or on the sward"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "By that grave, my lords, which made me orphaned girl and dowered lady,
                    I deny you wife and ward!"

    XVI.

    Unto each she bowed her head and swept past with lofty tread.
                        _Toll slowly._
    Ere the midnight-bell had ceased, in the chapel had the priest
                    Blessed her, bride of Linteged.

    XVII.

    Fast and fain the bridal train along the night-storm rode amain--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Hard the steeds of lord and serf struck their hoofs out on the turf,
                        In the pauses of the rain.

    XVIII.

    Fast and fain the kinsmen's train along the storm pursued amain--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Steed on steed-track, dashing off,--thickening, doubling, hoof on hoof,
                    In the pauses of the rain.

    XIX.

    And the bridegroom led the flight on his red-roan steed of might--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And the bride lay on his arm, still, as if she feared no harm,
                    Smiling out into the night.

    XX.

    "Dost thou fear?" he said at last. "Nay," she answered him in haste,--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Not such death as we could find--only life with one behind.
                    Ride on fast as fear, ride fast!"

    XXI.

    Up the mountain wheeled the steed--girth to ground, and fetlocks
        spread--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Headlong bounds, and rocking flanks,--down he staggered, down the
        banks,
                    To the towers of Linteged.

    XXII.

    High and low the serfs looked out, red the flambeaus tossed about--
                        _Toll slowly._
    In the courtyard rose the cry, "Live the Duchess and Sir Guy!"
                        But she never heard them shout.

    XXIII.

    On the steed she dropped her cheek, kissed his mane and kissed his
        neck--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "I had happier died by thee than lived on, a Lady Leigh,"
                    Were the first words she did speak.

    XXIV.

    But a three months' joyaunce lay 'twixt that moment and to-day--
                        _Toll slowly._
    When five hundred archers tall stand beside the castle wall
                    To recapture Duchess May.

    XXV.

    And the castle standeth black with the red sun at its back--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And a fortnight's siege is done, and, except the duchess, none
                    Can misdoubt the coming wrack.

    XXVI.

    Then the captain, young Lord Leigh, with his eyes so grey of blee--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And thin lips that scarcely sheath the cold white gnashing of his
        teeth,
                    Gnashed in smiling, absently,--

    XXVII.

    Cried aloud, "So goes the day, bridegroom fair of Duchess May!"
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Look thy last upon that sun! if thou seest to-morrow's one
                    'T will be through a foot of clay.

    XXVIII.

    "Ha, fair bride! dost hear no sound save that moaning of the hound?"
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Thou and I have parted troth, yet I keep my vengeance-oath,
                    And the other may come round.

    XXIX.

    "Ha! thy will is brave to dare, and thy new love past compare"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Yet thine old love's falchion brave is as strong a thing to have,
                    As the will of lady fair.

    XXX.

    "Peck on blindly, netted dove! If a wife's name thee behove"--
                        _Toll slowly_--
    "Thou shalt wear the same to-morrow, ere the grave has hid the sorrow
                    Of thy last ill-mated love.

    XXXI.

    "O'er his fixed and silent mouth, thou and I will call back troth":
                        _Toll slowly._
    "He shall altar be and priest,--and he will not cry at least
                    'I forbid you, I am loth!'

    XXXII.

    "I will wring thy fingers pale in the gauntlet of my mail":
                        _Toll slowly._
    "'Little hand and muckle gold' close shall lie within my hold,
                    As the sword did, to prevail."

    XXXIII.

    Oh, the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Oh, and laughed the Duchess May, and her soul did put away
                    All his boasting, for a jest.

    XXXIV.

    In her chamber did she sit, laughing low to think of it,--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Tower is strong and will is free: thou canst boast, my lord of Leigh,
                    But thou boastest little wit."

    XXXV.

    In her tire-glass gazed she, and she blushed right womanly--
                        _Toll slowly._
    She blushed half from her disdain, half her beauty was so plain,
                    --"Oath for oath, my lord of Leigh!"

    XXXVI.

    Straight she called her maidens in--"Since ye gave me blame herein"--
                        _Toll slowly_--
    "That a bridal such as mine should lack gauds to make it fine,
                    Come and shrive me from that sin.

    XXXVII.

    "It is three months gone to-day since I gave mine hand away":
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Bring the gold and bring the gem, we will keep bride-state in them,
                    While we keep the foe at bay.

    XXXVIII.

    "On your arms I loose mine hair; comb it smooth and crown it fair":
                        _Toll slowly._
    "I would look in purple pall from this lattice down the wall,
                    And throw scorn to one that's there!"

    XXXIX.

    Oh, the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west--
                        _Toll slowly._
    On the tower the castle's lord leant in silence on his sword,
                    With an anguish in his breast.

    XL.

    With a spirit-laden weight did he lean down passionate:
                        _Toll slowly._
    They have almost sapped the wall,--they will enter therewithal
                    With no knocking at the gate.

    XLI.

    Then the sword he leant upon, shivered, snapped upon the stone--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Sword," he thought, with inward laugh, "ill thou servest for a staff
                    When thy nobler use is done!

    XLII.

    "Sword, thy nobler use is done! tower is lost, and shame begun!"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "If we met them in the breach, hilt to hilt or speech to speech,
                    We should die there, each for one.

    XLIII.

    "If we met them at the wall, we should singly, vainly fall"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "But if _I_ die here alone,--then I die who am but one,
                    And die nobly for them all.

    XLIV.

    "Five true friends lie for my sake in the moat and in the brake"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Thirteen warriors lie at rest with a black wound in the breast,
                    And not one of these will wake.

    XLV.

    "So, no more of this shall be! heart-blood weighs too heavily"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "And I could not sleep in grave, with the faithful and the brave
                    Heaped around and over me.

    XLVI.

    "Since young Clare a mother hath, and young Ralph a plighted faith"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Since my pale young sister's cheeks blush like rose when Ronald
        speaks,
                    Albeit never a word she saith--

    XLVII.

    "These shall never die for me: life-blood falls too heavily":
                        _Toll slowly._
    "And if _I_ die here apart, o'er my dead and silent heart
                    They shall pass out safe and free.

    XLVIII.

    "When the foe hath heard it said--'Death holds Guy of Linteged'"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "That new corse new peace shall bring, and a blessed, blessed thing
                    Shall the stone be at its head.

    XLIX.

    "Then my friends shall pass out free, and shall bear my memory"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Then my foes shall sleek their pride, soothing fair my widowed bride
                    Whose sole sin was love of me:

    L.

    "With their words all smooth and sweet, they will front her and
        entreat"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "And their purple pall will spread underneath her fainting head
                    While her tears drop over it.

    LI.

    "She will weep her woman's tears, she will pray her woman's prayers"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "But her heart is young in pain, and her hopes will spring again
                    By the suntime of her years.

    LII.

    "Ah, sweet May! ah, sweetest grief!--once I vowed thee my belief"--
                        _Toll slowly_--
    "That thy name expressed thy sweetness,--May of poets, in completeness!
                    Now my May-day seemeth brief."

    LIII.

    All these silent thoughts did swim o'er his eyes grown strange and
        dim--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Till his true men, in the place, wished they stood there face to face
                    With the foe instead of him.

    LIV.

    "One last oath, my friends that wear faithful hearts to do and dare!"
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Tower must fall and bride be lost--swear me service worth the cost!"
                    Bold they stood around to swear.

    LV.

    "Each man clasp my hand and swear by the deed we failed in there"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Not for vengeance, not for right, will ye strike one blow to-night!"
                    Pale they stood around to swear.

    LVI.

    "One last boon, young Ralph and Clare! faithful hearts to do and dare!"
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Bring that steed up from his stall, which she kissed before you all.
                    Guide him up the turret-stair.

    LVII.

    "Ye shall harness him aright, and lead upward to this height:"
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Once in love and twice in war hath he borne me strong and far:
                    He shall bear me far to-night."

    LVIII.

    Then his men looked to and fro, when they heard him speaking so--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "'Las! the noble heart," they thought, "he in sooth is grief-
        distraught:
                    Would we stood here with the foe!"

    LIX.

    But a fire flashed from his eye, 'twixt their thought and their reply--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Have ye so much time to waste? We who ride here, must ride fast
                    As we wish our foes to fly."

    LX.

    They have fetched the steed with care, in the harness he did wear--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Past the court and through the doors, across the rushes of the floors,
                    But they goad him up the stair.

    LXI.

    Then from out her bower chambere did the Duchess May repair:
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Tell me now what is your need," said the lady, "of this steed,
                    That ye goad him up the stair?"

    LXII.

    Calm she stood; unbodkined through, fell her dark hair to her shoe:
                        _Toll slowly._
    And the smile upon her face, ere she left the tiring-glass,
                    Had not time enough to go.

    LXIII.

    "Get thee back, sweet Duchess May! hope is gone like yesterday":
                        _Toll slowly._
    One half-hour completes the breach; and thy lord grows wild of speech--
                    Get thee in, sweet lady, and pray!

    LXIV.

    "In the east tower, high'st of all, loud he cries for steed from
        stall":
                        _Toll slowly._
    "'He would ride as far,' quoth he, 'as for love and victory,
                    Though he rides the castle-wall.'

    LXV.

    "And we fetch the steed from stall, up where never a hoof did fall"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Wifely prayer meets deathly need: may the sweet Heavens hear thee
        plead
                    If he rides the castle-wall!"

    LXVI.

    Low she dropt her head, and lower, till her hair coiled on the floor--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And tear after tear you heard fall distinct as any word
                    Which you might be listening for.

    LXVII.

    "Get thee in, thou soft ladye! here is never a place for thee!"
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Braid thine hair and clasp thy gown, that thy beauty in its moan
                    May find grace with Leigh of Leigh."

    LXVIII.

    She stood up in bitter case, with a pale yet steady face:
                        _Toll slowly._
    Like a statue thunderstruck, which, though quivering, seems to look
                    Right against the thunder-place.

    LXIX.

    And her foot trod in, with pride, her own tears i' the stone beside--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Go to, faithful friends, go to! judge no more what ladies do,
                    No, nor how their lords may ride!"

    LXX.

    Then the good steed's rein she took, and his neck did kiss and stroke:
                        _Toll slowly._
    Soft he neighed to answer her, and then followed up the stair
                    For the love of her sweet look:

    LXXI.

    Oh, and steeply, steeply wound up the narrow stair around--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Oh, and closely, closely speeding, step by step beside her treading
                    Did he follow, meek as hound.

    LXXII.

    On the east tower, high'st of all,--there, where never a hoof did
        fall--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Out they swept, a vision steady, noble steed and lovely lady,
                    Calm as if in bower or stall.

    LXXIII.

    Down she knelt at her lord's knee, and she looked up silently--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And he kissed her twice and thrice, for that look within her eyes
                    Which he could not bear to see.

    LXXIV.

    Quoth he, "Get thee from this strife, and the sweet saints bless thy
        life!"
                        _Toll slowly._
    "In this hour I stand in need of my noble red-roan steed,
                    But no more of my noble wife."

    LXXV.

    Quoth she, "Meekly have I done all thy biddings under sun":
                        _Toll slowly._
    "But by all my womanhood, which is proved so, true and good,
                    I will never do this one.

    LXXVI.

    "Now by womanhood's degree and by wifehood's verity"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "In this hour if thou hast need of thy noble red-roan steed,
                    Thou hast also need of _me_.

    LXXVII.

    "By this golden ring ye see on this lifted hand pardie"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "If, this hour, on castle-wall can be room for steed from stall,
                    Shall be also room for _me_.

    LXXVIII.

    "So the sweet saints with me be," (did she utter solemnly)--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "If a man, this eventide, on this castle wall will ride,
                    He shall ride the same with _me_."

    LXXIX.

    Oh, he sprang up in the selle and he laughed out bitter-well--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Wouldst thou ride among the leaves, as we used on other eves,
                    To hear chime a vesper-bell?"

    LXXX.

    She clung closer to his knee--"Ay, beneath the cypress-tree!"
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Mock me not, for otherwhere than along the greenwood fair
                    Have I ridden fast with thee.

    LXXXI.

    "Fast I rode with new-made vows from my angry kinsman's house":
                        _Toll slowly._
    "What, and would you men should reck that I dared more for love's sake
                    As a bride than as a spouse?

    LXXXII.

    "What, and would you it should fall, as a proverb, before all"--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "That a bride may keep your side while through castle-gate you ride,
                    Yet eschew the castle-wall?"

    LXXXIII.

    Ho! the breach yawns into ruin and roars up against her suing--
                        _Toll slowly._
    With the inarticulate din and the dreadful falling in--
                    Shrieks of doing and undoing!

    LXXXIV.

    Twice he wrung her hands in twain, but the small hands closed again.
                        _Toll slowly._
    Back he reined the steed--back, back! but she trailed along his track
                    With a frantic clasp and strain.

    LXXXV.

    Evermore the foemen pour through the crash of window and door--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And the shouts of Leigh and Leigh, and the shrieks of "kill!" and
        "flee!"
                    Strike up clear amid the roar.

    LXXXVI.

    Thrice he wrung her hands in twain, but they closed and clung again--
                        _Toll slowly._
    While she clung, as one, withstood, clasps a Christ upon the rood,
                    In a spasm of deathly pain.

    LXXXVII.

    She clung wild and she clung mute with her shuddering lips half-shut.
                        _Toll slowly._
    Her head fallen as half in swound, hair and knee swept on the ground,
                    She clung wild to stirrup and foot.

    LXXXVIII.

    Back he reined his steed back-thrown on the slippery coping-stone:
                        _Toll slowly._
    Back the iron hoofs did grind on the battlement behind
                    Whence a hundred feet went down:

    LXXXIX.

    And his heel did press and goad on the quivering flank bestrode--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Friends and brothers, save my wife! Pardon, sweet, in change for
        life,--
                    But I ride alone to God."

    XC.

    Straight as if the Holy name had upbreathed her like a flame--
                        _Toll slowly._
    She upsprang, she rose upright, in his selle she sate in sight,
                    By her love she overcame.

    XCI.

    And her head was on his breast where she smiled as one at rest--
                        _Toll slowly._
    "Ring," she cried, "O vesper-bell in the beechwood's old chapelle--
                    But the passing-bell rings best!"

    XCII.

    They have caught out at the rein which Sir Guy threw loose--in vain--
                        _Toll slowly._
    For the horse in stark despair, with his front hoofs poised in air,
                    On the last verge rears amain.

    XCIII.

    Now he hangs, he rocks between, and his nostrils curdle in--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Now he shivers head and hoof and the flakes of foam fall off,
                    And his face grows fierce and thin:

    XCIV.

    And a look of human woe from his staring eyes did go:
                        _Toll slowly._
    And a sharp cry uttered he, in a foretold agony
                    Of the headlong death below,--

    XCV.

    And, "Ring, ring, thou passing-bell," still she cried, "i' the old
        chapelle!"
                        _Toll slowly._
    Then, back-toppling, crashing back--a dead weight flung out to wrack,
                    Horse and riders overfell.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Oh, the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And I read this ancient Rhyme, in the churchyard, while the chime
                    Slowly tolled for one at rest.

    II.

    The abeles moved in the sun, and the river smooth did run--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And the ancient Rhyme rang strange, with its passion and its change,
                    Here, where all done lay undone.

    III.

    And beneath a willow tree I a little grave did see--
                        _Toll slowly_--
    Where was graved--HERE, UNDEFILED, LIETH MAUD, A THREE-YEAR CHILD,
                    EIGHTEEN HUNDRED FORTY-THREE.

    IV.

    Then O spirits, did I say, ye who rode so fast that day--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Did star-wheels and angel wings with their holy winnowings
                    Keep beside you all the way?

    V.

    Though in passion ye would dash, with a blind and heavy crash--
                        _Toll slowly_--
    Up against the thick-bossed shield of God's judgment in the field,--
                    Though your heart and brain were rash,--

    VI.

    Now, your will is all unwilled; now, your pulses are all stilled:
                        _Toll slowly._
    Now, ye lie as meek and mild (whereso laid) as Maud the child
                    Whose small grave was lately filled.

    VII.

    Beating heart and burning brow, ye are very patient now--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And the children might be bold to pluck the kingcups from your mould
                    Ere a month had let them grow.

    VIII.

    And you let the goldfinch sing in the alder near in spring--
                        _Toll slowly._
    Let her build her nest and sit all the three weeks out on it,
                    Murmuring not at anything.

    IX.

    In your patience ye are strong, cold and heat ye take not wrong--
                        _Toll slowly._
    When the trumpet of the angel blows eternity's evangel,
                    Time will seem to you not long.

    X.

    Oh, the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And I said in underbreath,--All our life is mixed with death,
                    And who knoweth which is best?

    XI.

    Oh, the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west--
                        _Toll slowly._
    And I smiled to think God's greatness flowed around our
        incompleteness,--
                    Round our restlessness, His rest.




_THE ROMANCE OF THE SWAN'S NEST._

    So the dreams depart,
    So the fading phantoms flee,
    And the sharp reality
    Now must act its part.

    WESTWOOD'S _Beads from a Rosary_


    I.

    Little Ellie sits alone
      'Mid the beeches of a meadow,
        By a stream-side on the grass,
    And the trees are showering down
      Doubles of their leaves in shadow
        On her shining hair and face.

    II.

    She has thrown her bonnet by,
      And her feet she has been dipping
        In the shallow water's flow:
    Now she holds them nakedly
      In her hands, all sleek and dripping,
        While she rocketh to and fro.

    III.

    Little Ellie sits alone,
      And the smile she softly uses
        Fills the silence like a speech
    While she thinks what shall be done,
      And the sweetest pleasure chooses
        For her future within reach.

    IV.

    Little Ellie in her smile
      Chooses--"I will have a lover
        Riding on a steed of steeds:
    He shall love me without guile,
      And to _him_ I will discover
        The swan's nest among the reeds.

    V.

    "And the steed shall be red-roan,
      And the lover shall be noble,
        With an eye that takes the breath:
    And the lute he plays upon
      Shall strike ladies into trouble,
        As his sword strikes men to death.

    VI.

    "And the steed it shall be shod
      All in silver, housed in azure,
        And the mane shall swim the wind;
    And the hoofs along the sod
      Shall flash onward and keep measure,
        Till the shepherds look behind.

    VII.

    "But my lover will not prize
      All the glory that he rides in,
        When he gazes in my face:
    He will say, 'O Love, thine eyes
      Build the shrine my soul abides in,
        And I kneel here for thy grace!'

    VIII.

    "Then, ay, then he shall kneel low,
      With the red-roan steed anear him
        Which shall seem to understand,
    Till I answer, 'Rise and go!
      For the world must love and fear him
        Whom I gift with heart and hand.'

    IX.

    "Then he will arise so pale,
      I shall feel my own lips tremble
        With a _yes_ I must not say,
    Nathless maiden-brave, 'Farewell,'
      I will utter, and dissemble--
        'Light to-morrow with to-day!'

    X.

    "Then he'll ride among the hills
      To the wide world past the river,
        There to put away all wrong;
    To make straight distorted wills,
      And to empty the broad quiver
        Which the wicked bear along.

    XI.

    "Three times shall a young foot-page
      Swim the stream and climb the mountain
        And kneel down beside my feet--
    'Lo, my master sends this gage,
      Lady, for thy pity's counting!
        What wilt thou exchange for it?'

    XII.

    "And the first time I will send
      A white rosebud for a guerdon,
        And the second time, a glove;
    But the third time--I may bend
      From my pride, and answer--'Pardon
        If he comes to take my love.'

    XIII.

    "Then the young foot-page will run,
      Then my lover will ride faster,
        Till he kneeleth at my knee:
    'I am a duke's eldest son,
      Thousand serfs do call me master,
        But, O Love, I love but _thee_!'

    XIV.

    "He will kiss me on the mouth
      Then, and lead me as a lover
        Through the crowds that praise his deeds;
    And, when soul-tied by one troth,
      Unto _him_ I will discover
        That swan's nest among the reeds."

    XV.

    Little Ellie, with her smile
      Not yet ended, rose up gaily,
        Tied the bonnet, donned the shoe,
    And went homeward, round a mile,
      Just to see, as she did daily,
        What more eggs were with the two.

    XVI.

    Pushing through the elm-tree copse,
      Winding up the stream, light-hearted,
        Where the osier pathway leads,
    Past the boughs she stoops--and stops.
      Lo, the wild swan had deserted,
        And a rat had gnawed the reeds!

    XVII.

    Ellie went home sad and slow.
      If she found the lover ever,
        With his red-roan steed of steeds,
    Sooth I know not; but I know
      She could never show him--never,
        That swan's nest among the reeds!




_BERTHA IN THE LANE._


    I.

    Put the broidery-frame away,
      For my sewing is all done:
    The last thread is used to-day,
      And I need not join it on.
    Though the clock stands at the noon
    I am weary. I have sewn,
    Sweet, for thee, a wedding-gown.

    II.

    Sister, help me to the bed,
      And stand near me, Dearest-sweet.
    Do not shrink nor be afraid,
      Blushing with a sudden heat!
    No one standeth in the street?--
    By God's love I go to meet,
    Love I thee with love complete.

    III.

    Lean thy face down; drop it in
      These two hands, that I may hold
    'Twixt their palms thy cheek and chin,
      Stroking back the curls of gold:
    'T is a fair, fair face, in sooth--
    Larger eyes and redder mouth
    Than mine were in my first youth.

    IV.

    Thou art younger by seven years--
      Ah!--so bashful at my gaze,
    That the lashes, hung with tears,
      Grow too heavy to upraise?
    I would wound thee by no touch
    Which thy shyness feels as such.
    Dost thou mind me, Dear, so much?

    V.

    Have I not been nigh a mother
      To thy sweetness--tell me, Dear?
    Have we not loved one another
      Tenderly, from year to year,
    Since our dying mother mild
    Said with accents undefiled,
    "Child, be mother to this child"!

    VI.

    Mother, mother, up in heaven,
      Stand up on the jasper sea,
    And be witness I have given
      All the gifts required of me,--
    Hope that blessed me, bliss that crowned,
    Love that left me with a wound,
    Life itself that turneth round!

    VII.

      Thou art standing in the room,
    In a molten glory shrined
      That rays off into the gloom!
    But thy smile is bright and bleak
    Like cold waves--I cannot speak,
    I sob in it, and grow weak.

    VIII.

    Ghostly mother, keep aloof
      One hour longer from my soul,
    For I still am thinking of
      Earth's warm-beating joy and dole!
    On my finger is a ring
    Which I still see glittering
    When the night hides everything.

    IX.

    Little sister, thou art pale!
      Ah, I have a wandering brain--
    But I lose that fever-bale,
      And my thoughts grow calm again.
    Lean down closer--closer still!
    I have words thine ear to fill,
    And would kiss thee at my will.

    X.

    Dear, I heard thee in the spring,
      Thee and Robert--through the trees,--
    When we all went gathering
      Boughs of May-bloom for the bees.
    Do not start so! think instead
    How the sunshine overhead
    Seemed to trickle through the shade.

    XI.

    What a day it was, that day!
      Hills and vales did openly
    Seem to heave and throb away
      At the sight of the great sky:
    And the silence, as it stood
    In the glory's golden flood,
    Audibly did bud, and bud.

    XII.

    Through the winding hedgerows green,
      How we wandered, I and you,
    With the bowery tops shut in,
      And the gates that showed the view!
    How we talked there; thrushes soft
    Sang our praises out, or oft
    Bleatings took them from the croft:

    XIII.

    Till the pleasure grown too strong
      Left me muter evermore,
    And, the winding road being long,
      I walked out of sight, before,
    And so, wrapt in musings fond,
    Issued (past the wayside pond)
    On the meadow-lands beyond.

    XIV.

    I sate down beneath the beech
      Which leans over to the lane,
    And the far sound of your speech
      Did not promise any pain;
    And I blessed you full and free,
    With a smile stooped tenderly
    O'er the May-flowers on my knee.

    XV.

    But the sound grew into word
      As the speakers drew more near--
    Sweet, forgive me that I heard
      What you wished me not to hear.
    Do not weep so, do not shake,
    Oh,--I heard thee, Bertha, make
    Good true answers for my sake.

    XVI.

    Yes, and HE too! let him stand
      In thy thoughts, untouched by blame.
    Could he help it, if my hand
      He had claimed with hasty claim?
    That was wrong perhaps--but then
    Such things be--and will, again.
    Women cannot judge for men.

    XVII.

    Had he seen thee when he swore
      He would love but me alone?
    Thou wast absent, sent before
      To our kin in Sidmouth town.
    When he saw thee who art best
    Past compare, and loveliest.
    He but judged thee as the rest.

    XVIII.

    Could we blame him with grave words,
      Thou and I, Dear, if we might?
    Thy brown eyes have looks like birds
      Flying straightway to the light:
    Mine are older.--Hush!--look out--
    Up the street! Is none without?
    How the poplar swings about!

    XIX.

    And that hour--beneath the beech,
      When I listened in a dream,
    And he said in his deep speech
      That he owed me all _esteem_,--
    Each word swam in on my brain
    With a dim, dilating pain,
    Till it burst with that last strain.

    XX.

    I fell flooded with a dark,
      In the silence of a swoon.
    When I rose, still cold and stark,
      There was night; I saw the moon
    And the stars, each in its place,
    And the May-blooms on the grass,
    Seemed to wonder what I was.

    XXI.

    And I walked as if apart
      From myself, when I could stand,
    And I pitied my own heart,
      As if I held it in my hand--
    Somewhat coldly, with a sense
    Of fulfilled benevolence,
    And a "Poor thing" negligence.

    XXII.

    And I answered coldly too,
      When you met me at the door;
    And I only _heard_ the dew
      Dripping from me to the floor:
    And the flowers, I bade you see,
    Were too withered for the bee,--
    As my life, henceforth, for me.

    XXIII.

    Do not weep so--Dear,--heart-warm!
      All was best as it befell.
    If I say he did me harm,
      I speak wild,--I am not well.
    All his words were kind and good--
    _He esteemed me._ Only, blood
    Runs so faint in womanhood!

    XXIV.

    Then I always was too grave,--
      Liked the saddest ballad sung,--
    With that look, besides, we have
      In our faces, who die young.
    I had died, Dear, all the same;
    Life's long, joyous, jostling game
    Is too loud for my meek shame.

    XXV.

    We are so unlike each other,
      Thou and I, that none could guess
    We were children of one mother,
      But for mutual tenderness.
    Thou art rose-lined from the cold,
    And meant verily to hold
    Life's pure pleasures manifold.

    XXVI.

    I am pale as crocus grows
      Close beside a rose-tree's root;
    Whosoe'er would reach the rose,
      Treads the crocus underfoot.
    _I_, like May-bloom on thorn-tree,
    Thou, like merry summer-bee,--
    Fit that I be plucked for thee!

    XXVII.

    Yet who plucks me?--no one mourns,
      I have lived my season out,
    And now die of my own thorns
      Which I could not live without.
    Sweet, be merry! How the light
    Comes and goes! If it be night,
    Keep the candles in my sight.

    XXVIII.

    Are there footsteps at the door?
      Look out quickly. Yea, or nay?
    Some one might be waiting for
      Some last word that I might say.
    Nay? So best!--so angels would
    Stand off clear from deathly road,
    Not to cross the sight of God.

    XXIX.

    Colder grow my hands and feet.
      When I wear the shroud I made,
    Let the folds lie straight and neat,
      And the rosemary be spread,
    That if any friend should come,
    (To see _thee_, Sweet!) all the room
    May be lifted out of gloom.

    XXX.

    And, dear Bertha, let me keep
      On my hand this little ring,
    Which at nights, when others sleep,
      I can still see glittering!
    Let me wear it out of sight,
    In the grave,--where it will light
    All the dark up, day and night.

    XXXI.

    On that grave drop not a tear!
      Else, though fathom-deep the place,
    Through the woollen shroud I wear
      I shall feel it on my face.
    Rather smile there, blessed one,
    Thinking of me in the sun,
    Or forget me--smiling on!

    XXXII.

    Art thou near me? nearer! so--
      Kiss me close upon the eyes,
    That the earthly light may go
      Sweetly, as it used to rise
    When I watched the morning-grey
    Strike, betwixt the hills, the way
    He was sure to come that day.

    XXXIII.

    So,--no more vain words be said!
      The hosannas nearer roll.
    Mother, smile now on thy Dead,
      I am death-strong in my soul.
    Mystic Dove alit on cross,
    Guide the poor bird of the snows
    Through the snow-wind above loss!

    XXXIV.

    Jesus, Victim, comprehending
      Love's divine self-abnegation,
    Cleanse my love in its self-spending,
      And absorb the poor libation!
    Wind my thread of life up higher,
    Up, through angels' hands of fire!
    I aspire while I expire.




_LADY GERALDINE'S COURTSHIP:_

A ROMANCE OF THE AGE.

_A Poet writes to his Friend._ PLACE--_A Room in Wycombe Hall._
TIME--_Late in the evening._


    I.

    Dear my friend and fellow-student, I would lean my spirit o'er you!
    Down the purple of this chamber tears should scarcely run at will.
    I am humbled who was humble. Friend, I bow my head before you:
    You should lead me to my peasants, but their faces are too still.

    II.

    There's a lady, an earl's daughter,--she is proud and she is noble,
    And she treads the crimson carpet and she breathes the perfumed air,
    And a kingly blood sends glances up, her princely eye to trouble,
    And the shadow of a monarch's crown is softened in her hair.

    III.

    She has halls among the woodlands, she has castles by the breakers,
    She has farms and she has manors, she can threaten and command:
    And the palpitating engines snort in steam across her acres,
    As they mark upon the blasted heaven the measure of the land.

    IV.

    There are none of England's daughters who can show a prouder presence;
    Upon princely suitors' praying she has looked in her disdain.
    She was sprung of English nobles, I was born of English peasants;
    What was _I_ that I should love her, save for competence to pain?

    V.

    I was only a poor poet, made for singing at her casement,
    As the finches or the thrushes, while she thought of other things.
    Oh, she walked so high above me, she appeared to my abasement,
    In her lovely silken murmur, like an angel clad in wings!

    VI.

    Many vassals bow before her as her carriage sweeps their doorways;
    She has blest their little children, as a priest or queen were she:
    Far too tender, or too cruel far, her smile upon the poor was,
    For I thought it was the same smile which she used to smile on _me_.

    VII.

    She has voters in the Commons, she has lovers in the palace,
    And, of all the fair court-ladies, few have jewels half as fine;
    Oft the Prince has named her beauty 'twixt the red wine and the
        chalice:
    Oh, and what was _I_ to love her? my beloved, my Geraldine!

    VIII.

    Yet I could not choose but love her: I was born to poet-uses,
    To love all things set above me, all of good and all of fair.
    Nymphs of mountain, not of valley, we are wont to call the Muses;
    And in nympholeptic climbing, poets pass from mount to star.

    IX.

    And because I was a poet, and because the public praised me,
    With a critical deduction for the modern writer's fault,
    I could sit at rich men's tables,--though the courtesies that raised
        me,
    Still suggested clear between us the pale spectrum of the salt.

    X.

    And they praised me in her presence--"Will your book appear this
        summer?"
    Then returning to each other--"Yes, our plans are for the moors."
    Then with whisper dropped behind me--"There he is! the latest comer.
    Oh, she only likes his verses! what is over, she endures.

    XI.

    "Quite low-born, self-educated! somewhat gifted though by nature,
    And we make a point of asking him,--of being very kind.
    You may speak, he does not hear you! and, besides, he writes no
        satire,--
    All these serpents kept by charmers leave the natural sting behind."

    XII.

    I grew scornfuller, grew colder, as I stood up there among them,
    Till as frost intense will burn you, the cold scorning scorched my
        brow;
    When a sudden silver speaking, gravely cadenced, over-rung them,
    And a sudden silken stirring touched my inner nature through.

    XIII.

    I looked upward and beheld her: with a calm and regnant spirit,
    Slowly round she swept her eyelids, and said clear before them all--
    "Have you such superfluous honour, sir, that able to confer it
    You will come down, Mister Bertram, as my guest to Wycombe Hall?"

    XIV.

    Here she paused; she had been paler at the first word of her speaking,
    But, because a silence followed it, blushed somewhat, as for shame:
    Then, as scorning her own feeling, resumed calmly--"I am seeking
    More distinction than these gentlemen think worthy of my claim.

    XV.

    "Ne'ertheless, you see, I seek it--not because I am a woman,"
    (Here her smile sprang like a fountain and, so, overflowed her mouth)
    "But because my woods in Sussex have some purple shades at gloaming
    Which are worthy of a king in state, or poet in his youth.

    XVI.

    "I invite you, Mister Bertram, to no scene for worldly speeches--
    Sir, I scarce should dare--but only where God asked the thrushes first:
    And if _you_ will sing beside them, in the covert of my beeches,
    I will thank you for the woodlands,--for the human world, at worst."

    XVII.

    Then she smiled around right childly, then she gazed around right
        queenly,
    And I bowed--I could not answer; alternated light and gloom--
    While as one who quells the lions, with a steady eye serenely,
    She, with level fronting eyelids, passed out stately from the room.

    XVIII.

    Oh, the blessed woods of Sussex, I can hear them still around me,
    With their leafy tide of greenery still rippling up the wind!
    Oh, the cursed woods of Sussex! where the hunter's arrow found me,
    When a fair face and a tender voice had made me mad and blind!

    XIX.

    In that ancient hall of Wycombe thronged the numerous guests invited,
    And the lovely London ladies trod the floors with gliding feet;
    And their voices low with fashion, not with feeling, softly freighted
    All the air about the windows with elastic laughters sweet.

    XX.

    For at eve the open windows flung their light out on the terrace
    Which the floating orbs of curtains did with gradual shadow sweep,
    While the swans upon the river, fed at morning by the heiress,
    Trembled downward through their snowy wings at music in their sleep.

    XXI.

    And there evermore was music, both of instrument and singing,
    Till the finches of the shrubberies grew restless in the dark;
    But the cedars stood up motionless, each in a moonlight's ringing,
    And the deer, half in the glimmer, strewed the hollows of the park.

    XXII.

    And though sometimes she would bind me with her silver-corded speeches
    To commix my words and laughter with the converse and the jest,
    Oft I sat apart and, gazing on the river through the beeches,
    Heard, as pure the swans swam down it, her pure voice o'erfloat the
        rest.

    XXIII.

    In the morning, horn of huntsman, hoof of steed and laugh of rider,
    Spread out cheery from the courtyard till we lost them in the hills,
    While herself and other ladies, and her suitors left beside her,
    Went a-wandering up the gardens through the laurels and abeles.

    XXIV.

    Thus, her foot upon the new-mown grass, bareheaded, with the flowing
    Of the virginal white vesture gathered closely to her throat,
    And the golden ringlets in her neck just quickened by her going,
    And appearing to breathe sun for air, and doubting if to float,--

    XXV.

    With a bunch of dewy maple, which her right hand held above her,
    And which trembled a green shadow in betwixt her and the skies,
    As she turned her face in going, thus, she drew me on to love her,
    And to worship the divineness of the smile hid in her eyes.

    XXVI.

    For her eyes alone smile constantly; her lips have serious sweetness,
    And her front is calm, the dimple rarely ripples on the cheek;
    But her deep blue eyes smile constantly, as if they in discreetness
    Kept the secret of a happy dream she did not care to speak.

    XXVII.

    Thus she drew me the first morning, out across into the garden,
    And I walked among her noble friends and could not keep behind.
    Spake she unto all and unto me--"Behold, I am the warden
    Of the song-birds in these lindens, which are cages to their mind.

    XXVIII.

    "But within this swarded circle into which the lime-walk brings us,
    Whence the beeches, rounded greenly, stand away in reverent fear,
    I will let no music enter, saving what the fountain sings us
    Which the lilies round the basin may seem pure enough to hear.

    XXIX.

    "The live air that waves the lilies waves the slender jet of water
    Like a holy thought sent feebly up from soul of fasting saint:
    Whereby lies a marble Silence, sleeping (Lough the sculptor wrought
        her),
    So asleep she is forgetting to say Hush!--a fancy quaint.

    XXX.

    "Mark how heavy white her eyelids! not a dream between them lingers;
    And the left hand's index droppeth from the lips upon the cheek:
    While the right hand,--with the symbol-rose held slack within the
        fingers,--
    Has fallen backward in the basin--yet this Silence will not speak!

    XXXI.

    "That the essential meaning growing may exceed the special symbol,
    Is the thought as I conceive it: it applies more high and low.
    Our true noblemen will often through right nobleness grow humble,
    And assert an inward honour by denying outward show."

    XXXII.

    "Nay, your Silence," said I, "truly, holds her symbol-rose but slackly,
    Yet _she holds it_, or would scarcely be a Silence to our ken:
    And your nobles wear their ermine on the outside, or walk blackly
    In the presence of the social law as mere ignoble men.

    XXXIII.

    "Let the poets dream such dreaming! madam, in these British islands
    'T is the substance that wanes ever, 't is the symbol that exceeds.
    Soon we shall have nought but symbol: and, for statues like this
        Silence,
    Shall accept the rose's image--in another case, the weed's."

    XXXIV.

    "Not so quickly," she retorted,--"I confess, where'er you go, you
    Find for things, names--shows for actions, and pure gold for honour
        clear:
    But when all is run to symbol in the Social, I will throw you
    The world's book which now reads dryly, and sit down with Silence
        here."

    XXXV.

    Half in playfulness she spoke, I thought, and half in indignation;
    Friends, who listened, laughed her words off, while her lovers deemed
        her fair:
    A fair woman, flushed with feeling, in her noble-lighted station
    Near the statue's white reposing--and both bathed in sunny air!

    XXXVI.

    With the trees round, not so distant but you heard their vernal murmur,
    And beheld in light and shadow the leaves in and outward move,
    And the little fountain leaping toward the sun-heart to be warmer,
    Then recoiling in a tremble from the too much light above.

    XXXVII.

    'T is a picture for remembrance. And thus, morning after morning,
    Did I follow as she drew me by the spirit to her feet.
    Why, her greyhound followed also! dogs--we both were dogs for
        scorning--
    To be sent back when she pleased it and her path lay through the wheat.

    XXXVIII.

    And thus, morning after morning, spite of vows and spite of sorrow,
    Did I follow at her drawing, while the week-days passed along,--
    Just to feed the swans this noontide, or to see the fawns to-morrow,
    Or to teach the hill-side echo some sweet Tuscan in a song.

    XXXIX.

    Ay, for sometimes on the hill-side, while we sate down in the gowans,
    With the forest green behind us and its shadow cast before,
    And the river running under, and across it from the rowans
    A brown partridge whirring near us till we felt the air it bore,--

    XL.

    There, obedient to her praying, did I read aloud the poems
    Made to Tuscan flutes, or instruments more various of our own;
    Read the pastoral parts of Spenser, or the subtle interflowings
    Found in Petrarch's sonnets--here's the book, the leaf is folded down!

    XLI.

    Or at times a modern volume, Wordsworth's solemn-thoughted idyl,
    Howitt's ballad-verse, or Tennyson's enchanted reverie,--
    Or from Browning some "Pomegranate," which, if cut deep down the
        middle,
    Shows a heart within blood-tinctured, of a veined humanity.

    XLII.

    Or at times I read there, hoarsely, some new poem of my making:
    Poets ever fail in reading their own verses to their worth,
    For the echo in you breaks upon the words which you are speaking,
    And the chariot wheels jar in the gate through which you drive them
        forth.

    XLIII.

    After, when we were grown tired of books, the silence round us flinging
    A slow arm of sweet compression, felt with beatings at the breast
    She would break out on a sudden in a gush of woodland singing,
    Like a child's emotion in a god--a naiad tired of rest.

    XLIV.

    Oh, to see or hear her singing! scarce I know which is divinest,
    For her looks sing too--she modulates her gestures on the tune,
    And her mouth stirs with the song, like song; and when the notes are
        finest,
    'T is the eyes that shoot out vocal light and seem to swell them on.

    XLV.

    Then we talked--oh, how we talked! her voice, so cadenced in the
        talking,
    Made another singing--of the soul! a music without bars:
    While the leafy sounds of woodlands, humming round where we were
        walking,
    Brought interposition worthy-sweet,--as skies about the stars.

    XLVI.

    And she spake such good thoughts natural, as if she always thought
        them;
    She had sympathies so rapid, open, free as bird on branch,
    Just as ready to fly east as west, whichever way besought them,
    In the birchen-wood a chirrup, or a cock-crow in the grange.

    XLVII.

    In her utmost lightness there is truth--and often she speaks lightly,
    Has a grace in being gay which even mournful souls approve,
    For the root of some grave earnest thought is understruck so rightly
    As to justify the foliage and the waving flowers above.

    XLVIII.

    And she talked on--_we_ talked, rather! upon all things, substance,
        shadow,
    Of the sheep that browsed the grasses, of the reapers in the corn,
    Of the little children from the schools, seen winding through the
        meadow,
    Of the poor rich world beyond them, still kept poorer by its scorn.

    XLIX.

    So, of men, and so, of letters--books are men of higher stature,
    And the only men that speak aloud for future times to hear;
    So, of mankind in the abstract, which grows slowly into nature,
    Yet will lift the cry of "progress," as it trod from sphere to sphere.

    L.

    And her custom was to praise me when I said,--"The Age culls simples,
    With a broad clown's back turned broadly to the glory of the stars.
    We are gods by our own reck'ning, and may well shut up the temples,
    And wield on, amid the incense-steam, the thunder of our cars.

    LI.

    "For we throw out acclamations of self-thanking, self admiring,
    With, at every mile run faster,--'O the wondrous wondrous age!'
    Little thinking if we work our SOULS as nobly as our iron,
    Or if angels will commend us at the goal of pilgrimage.

    LII.

    "Why, what _is_ this patient entrance into nature's deep resources
    But the child's most gradual learning to walk upright without bane?
    When we drive out, from the cloud of steam, majestical white horses,
    Are we greater than the first men who led black ones by the mane?

    LIII.

    "If we trod the deeps of ocean, if we struck the stars in rising,
    If we wrapped the globe intensely with one hot electric breath,
    'T were but power within our tether, no new spirit-power comprising,
    And in life we were not greater men, nor bolder men in death."

    LIV.

    She was patient with my talking; and I loved her, loved her certes
    As I loved all heavenly objects, with uplifted eyes and hands;
    As I loved pure inspirations, loved the graces, loved the virtues,
    In a Love content with writing his own name on desert sands.

    LV.

    Or at least I thought so, purely; thought no idiot Hope was raising
    Any crown to crown Love's silence, silent Love that sate alone:
    Out, alas! the stag is like me, he that tries to go on grazing
    With the great deep gun-wound in his neck, then reels with sudden moan.

    LVI.

    It was thus I reeled. I told you that her hand had many suitors;
    But she smiles them down imperially as Venus did the waves,
    And with such a gracious coldness that they cannot press their futures
    On the present of her courtesy, which yieldingly enslaves.

    LVII.

    And this morning as I sat alone within the inner chamber
    With the great saloon beyond it, lost in pleasant thought serene,
    For I had been reading Camoens, that poem you remember,
    Which his lady's eyes are praised in as the sweetest ever seen.

    LVIII.

    And the book lay open, and my thought flew from it, taking from it
    A vibration and impulsion to an end beyond its own,
    As the branch of a green osier, when a child would overcome it,
    Springs up freely from his claspings and goes swinging in the sun.

    LIX.

    As I mused I heard a murmur; it grew deep as it grew longer,
    Speakers using earnest language--"Lady Geraldine, you _would_!"
    And I heard a voice that pleaded, ever on in accents stronger,
    As a sense of reason gave it power to make its rhetoric good.

    LX.

    Well I knew that voice; it was an earl's, of soul that matched his
        station,
    Soul completed into lordship, might and right read on his brow;
    Very finely courteous; far too proud to doubt his domination
    Of the common people, he atones for grandeur by a bow.

    LXI.

    High straight forehead, nose of eagle, cold blue eyes of less
        expression
    Than resistance, coldly casting off the looks of other men,
    As steel, arrows; unelastic lips which seem to taste possession
    And be cautious lest the common air should injure or distrain.

    LXII.

    For the rest, accomplished, upright,--ay, and standing by his order
    With a bearing not ungraceful; fond of art and letters too;
    Just a good man made a proud man,--as the sandy rocks that border
    A wild coast, by circumstances, in a regnant ebb and flow.

    LXIII.

    Thus, I knew that voice, I heard it, and I could not help the
        hearkening:
    In the room I stood up blindly, and my burning heart within
    Seemed to seethe and fuse my senses till they ran on all sides
        darkening,
    And scorched, weighed like melted metal round my feet that stood
        therein.

    LXIV.

    And that voice, I heard it pleading, for love's sake, for wealth,
        position,
    For the sake of liberal uses and great actions to be done:
    And she interrupted gently, "Nay, my lord, the old tradition
    Of your Normans, by some worthier hand than mine is, should be won."

    LXV.

    "Ah, that white hand!" he said quickly,--and in his he either drew it
    Or attempted--for with gravity and instance she replied,
    "Nay, indeed, my lord, this talk is vain, and we had best eschew it
    And pass on, like friends, to other points less easy to decide."

    LXVI.

    What he said again, I know not: it is likely that his trouble
    Worked his pride up to the surface, for she answered in slow scorn,
    "And your lordship judges rightly. Whom I marry shall be noble,
    Ay, and wealthy. I shall never blush to think how he was born."

    LXVII.

    There, I maddened! her words stung me. Life swept through me into
        fever,
    And my soul sprang up astonished, sprang full-statured in an hour.
    Know you what it is when anguish, with apocalyptic NEVER,
    To a Pythian height dilates you, and despair sublimes to power?

    LXVIII.

    From my brain the soul-wings budded, waved a flame about my body,
    Whence conventions coiled to ashes. I felt self-drawn out, as man,
    From amalgamate false natures, and I saw the skies grow ruddy
    With the deepening feet of angels, and I knew what spirits can.

    LXIX.

    I was mad, inspired--say either! (anguish worketh inspiration)
    Was a man or beast--perhaps so, for the tiger roars when speared;
    And I walked on, step by step along the level of my passion--
    Oh my soul! and passed the doorway to her face, and never feared.

    LXX.

    _He_ had left her, peradventure, when my footstep proved my coming,
    But for _her_--she half arose, then sate, grew scarlet and grew pale.
    Oh, she trembled! 't is so always with a worldly man or woman
    In the presence of true spirits; what else _can_ they do but quail?

    LXXI.

    Oh, she fluttered like a tame bird, in among its forest-brothers
    Far too strong for it; then drooping, bowed her face upon her hands;
    And I spake out wildly, fiercely, brutal truths of her and others:
    _I_, she planted in the desert, swathed her, windlike, with my sands.

    LXXII.

    I plucked up her social fictions, bloody-rooted though leaf-verdant,
    Trod them down with words of shaming,--all the purple and the gold.
    All the "landed stakes" and lordships, all that spirits pure and ardent
    Are cast out of love and honour because chancing not to hold.

    LXXIII.

    "For myself I do not argue," said I, "though I love you, madam,
    But for better souls that nearer to the height of yours have trod:
    And this age shows, to my thinking, still more infidels to Adam
    Than directly, by profession, simple infidels to God.

    LXXIV.

    "Yet, O God," I said, "O grave," I said, "O mother's heart and bosom,
    With whom first and last are equal, saint and corpse and little child!
    We are fools to your deductions, in these figments of heart-closing;
    We are traitors to your causes, in these sympathies defiled.

    LXXV.

    "Learn more reverence, madam, not for rank or wealth--_that_ needs no
        learning:
    _That_ comes quickly, quick as sin does, ay, and culminates to sin;
    But for Adam's seed, MAN! Trust me, 't is a clay above your scorning,
    With God's image stamped upon it, and God's kindling breath within.

    LXXVI.

    "What right have you, madam, gazing in your palace mirror daily,
    Getting so by heart your beauty which all others must adore,
    While you draw the golden ringlets down your fingers, to vow gaily
    You will wed no man that's only good to God, and nothing more?

    LXXVII.

    "Why, what right have you, made fair by that same God, the sweetest
        woman
    Of all women He has fashioned, with your lovely spirit-face
    Which would seem too near to vanish if its smile were not so human,
    And your voice of holy sweetness, turning common words to grace,--

    LXXVIII.

    "What right _can_ you have, God's other works to scorn, despise, revile
        them
    In the gross, as mere men, broadly--not as _noble_ men, forsooth,--
    As mere Pariahs of the outer world, forbidden to assoil them
    In the hope of living, dying, near that sweetness of your mouth?

    LXXIX.

    "Have you any answer, madam? If my spirit were less earthly,
    If its instrument were gifted with a better silver string,
    I would kneel down where I stand, and say--Behold me! I am worthy
    Of thy loving, for I love thee. I am worthy as a king.

    LXXX.

    "As it is--your ermined pride, I swear, shall feel this stain upon her,
    That _I_, poor, weak, tost with passion, scorned by me and you again,
    Love you, madam, dare to love you, to my grief and your dishonour,
    To my endless desolation, and your impotent disdain!"

    LXXXI.

    More mad words like these--mere madness! friend, I need not write them
        fuller,
    For I hear my hot soul dropping on the lines in showers of tears.
    Oh, a woman! friend, a woman! why, a beast had scarce been duller
    Than roar bestial loud complaints against the shining of the spheres.

    LXXXII.

    But at last there came a pause. I stood all vibrating with thunder
    Which my soul had used. The silence drew her face up like a call.
    Could you guess what word she uttered? She looked up, as if in wonder,
    With tears beaded on her lashes, and said--"Bertram!"--It was all.

    LXXXIII.

    If she had cursed me, and she might have, or if even, with queenly
        bearing
    Which at need is used by women, she had risen up and said,
    "Sir, you are my guest, and therefore I have given you a full hearing:
    Now, beseech you, choose a name exacting somewhat less, instead!"--

    LXXXIV.

    I had borne it: but that "Bertram"--why, it lies there on the paper
    A mere word, without her accent, and you cannot judge the weight
    Of the calm which crushed my passion: I seemed drowning in a vapour;
    And her gentleness destroyed me whom her scorn made desolate.

    LXXXV.

    So, struck backward and exhausted by that inward flow of passion
    Which had rushed on, sparing nothing, into forms of abstract truth,
    By a logic agonizing through unseemly demonstration,
    And by youth's own anguish turning grimly grey the hairs of youth,--

    LXXXVI.

    By the sense accursed and instant, that if even I spake wisely
    I spake basely--using truth, if what I spake indeed was true,
    To avenge wrong on a woman--_her_, who sate there weighing nicely
    A poor manhood's worth, found guilty of such deeds as I could do!--

    LXXXVII.

    By such wrong and woe exhausted--what I suffered and occasioned,--
    As a wild horse through a city runs with lightning in his eyes,
    And then dashing at a church's cold and passive wall, impassioned,
    Strikes the death into his burning brain, and blindly drops and dies--

    LXXXVIII.

    So I fell, struck down before her--do you blame me, friend, for
        weakness?
    'T was my strength of passion slew me!--fell before her like a stone;
    Fast the dreadful world rolled from me on its roaring wheels of
        blackness:
    When the light came I was lying in this chamber and alone.

    LXXXIX.

    Oh, of course she charged her lacqueys to bear out the sickly burden,
    And to cast it from her scornful sight, but not _beyond_ the gate;
    She is too kind to be cruel, and too haughty not to pardon
    Such a man as I; 't were something to be level to her hate.

    XC.

    But for me--you now are conscious why, my friend, I write this letter,
    How my life is read all backward, and the charm of life undone.
    I shall leave her house at dawn; I would to-night, if I were better--
    And I charge my soul to hold my body strengthened for the sun.

    XCI.

    When the sun has dyed the oriel, I depart, with no last gazes,
    No weak moanings (one word only, left in writing for her hands),
    Out of reach of all derision, and some unavailing praises,
    To make front against this anguish in the far and foreign lands.

    XCII.

    Blame me not. I would not squander life in grief--I am abstemious.
    I but nurse my spirit's falcon that its wing may soar again.
    There's no room for tears of weakness in the blind eyes of a Phemius:
    Into work the poet kneads them, and he does not die _till then_.


    CONCLUSION.

    I.

    Bertram finished the last pages, while along the silence ever
    Still in hot and heavy splashes fell the tears on every leaf.
    Having ended, he leans backward in his chair, with lips that quiver
    From the deep unspoken, ay, and deep unwritten thoughts of grief.

    II.

    Soh! how still the lady standeth! 'T is a dream--a dream of mercies!
    'Twixt the purple lattice-curtains how she standeth still and pale!
    'T is a vision, sure, of mercies, sent to soften his self curses,
    Sent to sweep a patient quiet o'er the tossing of his wail.

    III.

    "Eyes," he said, "now throbbing through me! are ye eyes that did undo
        me?
    Shining eyes, like antique jewels set in Parian statue-stone!
    Underneath that calm white forehead are ye ever burning torrid
    O'er the desolate sand-desert of my heart and life undone?"

    IV.

    With a murmurous stir uncertain, in the air the purple curtain
    Swelleth in and swelleth out around her motionless pale brows,
    While the gliding of the river sends a rippling noise for ever
    Through the open casement whitened by the moonlight's slant repose.

    V.

    Said he--"Vision of a lady! stand there silent, stand there steady!
    Now I see it plainly, plainly now I cannot hope or doubt--
    There, the brows of mild repression--there, the lips of silent passion,
    Curved like an archer's bow to send the bitter arrows out."

    VI.

    Ever, evermore the while in a slow silence she kept smiling,
    And approached him slowly, slowly, in a gliding measured pace;
    With her two white hands extended as if praying one offended,
    And a look of supplication gazing earnest in his face.

    VII.

    Said he--"Wake me by no gesture,--sound of breath, or stir of vesture!
    Let the blessed apparition melt not yet to its divine!
    No approaching--hush, no breathing! or my heart must swoon to death in
    The too utter life thou bringest, O thou dream of Geraldine!"

    VIII.

    Ever, evermore the while in a slow silence she kept smiling,
    But the tears ran over lightly from her eyes and tenderly:--
    "Dost thou, Bertram, truly love me? Is no woman far above me
    Found more worthy of thy poet-heart than such a one as _I_?"

    IX.

    Said he--"I would dream so ever, like the flowing of that river,
    Flowing ever in a shadow greenly onward to the sea!
    So, thou vision of all sweetness, princely to a full completeness
    Would my heart and life flow onward, deathward, through this dream of
        THEE!"

    X.

    Ever, evermore the while in a slow silence she kept smiling,
    While the silver tears ran faster down the blushing of her cheeks;
    Then with both her hands enfolding both of his, she softly told him,
    "Bertram, if I say I love thee, ... 't is the vision only speaks."

    XI.

    Softened, quickened to adore her, on his knee he fell before her,
    And she whispered low in triumph, "It shall be as I have sworn.
    Very rich he is in virtues, very noble--noble, certes;
    And I shall not blush in knowing that men call him lowly born."




_THE RUNAWAY SLAVE AT PILGRIM'S POINT._


    I.

    I stand on the mark beside the shore
      Of the first white pilgrim's bended knee,
    Where exile turned to ancestor,
      And God was thanked for liberty.
    I have run through the night, my skin is as dark,
    I bend my knee down on this mark:
      I look on the sky and the sea.

    II.

    O pilgrim-souls, I speak to you!
      I see you come proud and slow
    From the land of the spirits pale as dew
      And round me and round me ye go.
    O pilgrims, I have gasped and run
    All night long from the whips of one
      Who in your names works sin and woe!

    III.

    And thus I thought that I would come
      And kneel here where ye knelt before,
    And feel your souls around me hum
      In undertone to the ocean's roar;
    And lift my black face, my black hand,
    Here, in your names, to curse this land
      Ye blessed in freedom's, evermore.

    IV.

    I am black, I am black,
      And yet God made me, they say:
    But if He did so, smiling back
      He must have cast his work away
    Under the feet of his white creatures,
    With a look of scorn, that the dusky features
      Might be trodden again to clay.

    V.

    And yet He has made dark things
      To be glad and merry as light:
    There's a little dark bird sits and sings,
      There's a dark stream ripples out of sight,
    And the dark frogs chant in the safe morass,
    And the sweetest stars are made to pass
      O'er the face of the darkest night.

    VI.

    But _we_ who are dark, we are dark!
      Ah God, we have no stars!
    About our souls in care and cark
      Our blackness shuts like prison-bars:
    The poor souls crouch so far behind
    That never a comfort can they find
      By reaching through the prison-bars.

    VII.

    Indeed we live beneath the sky,
      That great smooth Hand of God stretched out
    On all His children fatherly,
      To save them from the dread and doubt
    Which would be if, from this low place,
    All opened straight up to His face
      Into the grand eternity.

    VIII.

    And still God's sunshine and His frost,
      They make us hot, they make us cold,
    As if we were not black and lost;
      And the beasts and birds, in wood and fold,
    Do fear and take us for very men:
    Could the whip-poor-will or the cat of the glen
      Look into my eyes and be bold?

    IX.

    I am black, I am black!
      But, once, I laughed in girlish glee,
    For one of my colour stood in the track
      Where the drivers drove, and looked at me,
    And tender and full was the look he gave--
    Could a slave look _so_ at another slave?--
      I look at the sky and the sea.

    X.

    And from that hour our spirits grew
      As free as if unsold, unbought:
    Oh, strong enough, since we were two,
      To conquer the world, we thought.
    The drivers drove us day by day;
    We did not mind, we went one way,
      And no better a freedom sought.

    XI.

    In the sunny ground between the canes,
      He said "I love you" as he passed;
    When the shingle-roof rang sharp with the rains,
      I heard how he vowed it fast:
    While others shook he smiled in the hut,
    As he carved me a bowl of the cocoa-nut
      Through the roar of the hurricanes.

    XII.

    I sang his name instead of a song,
      Over and over I sang his name,
    Upward and downward I drew it along
      My various notes,--the same, the same!
    I sang it low, that the slave-girls near
    Might never guess, from aught they could hear,
      It was only a name--a name.

    XIII.

    I look on the sky and the sea.
      We were two to love, and two to pray:
    Yes, two, O God, who cried to Thee,
      Though nothing didst Thou say!
    Coldly Thou sat'st behind the sun:
    And now I cry who am but one,
      Thou wilt not speak to-day.

    XIV.

    We were black, we were black,
      We had no claim to love and bliss,
    What marvel if each went to wrack?
      They wrung my cold hands out of his,
    They dragged him--where? I crawled to touch
    His blood's mark in the dust ... not much,
      Ye pilgrim-souls, though plain as _this_!

    XV.

    Wrong, followed by a deeper wrong!
      Mere grief's too good for such as I:
    So the white men brought the shame ere long
      To strangle the sob of my agony.
    They would not leave me for my dull
    Wet eyes!--it was too merciful
      To let me weep pure tears and die.

    XVI.

    I am black, I am black!
      I wore a child upon my breast,
    An amulet that hung too slack,
      And, in my unrest, could not rest:
    Thus we went moaning, child and mother,
    One to another, one to another,
      Until all ended for the best.

    XVII.

    For hark! I will tell you low, low,
      I am black, you see,--
    And the babe who lay on my bosom so,
      Was far too white, too white for me;
    As white as the ladies who scorned to pray
    Beside me at church but yesterday,
      Though my tears had washed a place for my knee.

    XVIII.

    My own, own child! I could not bear
      To look in his face, it was so white;
    I covered him up with a kerchief there,
      I covered his face in close and tight:
    And he moaned and struggled, as well might be,
    For the white child wanted his liberty--
      Ha, ha! he wanted the master-right.

    XIX.

    He moaned and beat with his head and feet,
      His little feet that never grew;
    He struck them out, as it was meet,
      Against my heart to break it through:
    I might have sung and made him mild,
    But I dared not sing to the white-faced child
      The only song I knew.

    XX.

    I pulled the kerchief very close:
      He could not see the sun, I swear,
    More, then, alive, than now he does
      From between the roots of the mango ... where?
    I know where. Close! A child and mother
    Do wrong to look at one another
      When one is black and one is fair.

    XXI.

    Why, in that single glance I had
      Of my child's face, ... I tell you all,
    I saw a look that made me mad!
      The _master's_ look, that used to fall
    On my soul like his lash ... or worse!
    And so, to save it from my curse,
      I twisted it round in my shawl.

    XXII.

    And he moaned and trembled from foot to head,
      He shivered from head to foot;
    Till after a time, he lay instead
      Too suddenly still and mute.
    I felt, beside, a stiffening cold:
    I dared to lift up just a fold,
      As in lifting a leaf of the mango-fruit.

    XXIII.

    But _my_ fruit ... ha, ha!--there, had been
      (I laugh to think on 't at this hour!)
    Your fine white angels (who have seen
      Nearest the secret of God's power)
    And plucked my fruit to make them wine,
    And sucked the soul of that child of mine
      As the humming-bird sucks the soul of the flower.

    XXIV.

    Ha, ha, the trick of the angels white!
      They freed the white child's spirit so.
    I said not a word, but day and night
      I carried the body to and fro,
    And it lay on my heart like a stone, as chill.
    --The sun may shine out as much as he will:
      I am cold, though it happened a month ago.

    XXV.

    From the white man's house, and the black man's hut,
      I carried the little body on;
    The forest's arms did round us shut,
      And silence through the trees did run:
    They asked no question as I went,
    They stood too high for astonishment,
      They could see God sit on his throne.

    XXVI.

    My little body, kerchiefed fast,
      I bore it on through the forest, on;
    And when I felt it was tired at last,
      I scooped a hole beneath the moon:
    Through the forest-tops the angels far,
    With a white sharp finger from every star,
      Did point and mock at what was done.

    XXVII.

    Yet when it was all done aught,--
      Earth, 'twixt me and my baby, strewed,--
    All, changed to black earth,--nothing white,--
      A dark child in the dark!--ensued
    Some comfort, and my heart grew young;
    I sate down smiling there and sung
      The song I learnt in my maidenhood.

    XXVIII.

    And thus we two were reconciled,
      The white child and black mother, thus;
    For as I sang it soft and wild,
      The same song, more melodious,
    Rose from the grave whereon I sate
    It was the dead child singing that,
      To join the souls of both of us.

    XXIX.

    I look on the sea and the sky.
      Where the pilgrims' ships first anchored lay
    The free sun rideth gloriously,
      But the pilgrim-ghosts have slid away
    Through the earliest streaks of the morn:
    My face is black, but it glares with a scorn
      Which they dare not meet by day.

    XXX.

    Ha!--in their stead, their hunter sons!
      Ha, ha! they are on me--they hunt in a ring!
    Keep off! I brave you all at once,
      I throw off your eyes like snakes that sting!
    You have killed the black eagle at nest, I think:
    Did you ever stand still in your triumph, and shrink
      From the stroke of her wounded wing?

    XXXI.

    (Man, drop that stone you dared to lift!--)
      I wish you who stand there five abreast.
    Each, for his own wife's joy and gift,
      A little corpse as safely at rest
    As mine in the mangoes! Yes, but _she_
    May keep live babies on her knee,
      And sing the song she likes the best.

    XXXII.

    I am not mad: I am black.
      I see you staring in my face--
    I know you staring, shrinking back,
      Ye are born of the Washington-race,
    And this land is the free America,
    And this mark on my wrist--(I prove what I say)
      Ropes tied me up here to the flogging-place.

    XXXIII.

    You think I shrieked then? Not a sound!
      I hung, as a gourd hangs in the sun;
    I only cursed them all around
      As softly as I might have done
    My very own child: from these sands
    Up to the mountains, lift your hands,
      O slaves, and end what I begun!

    XXXIV.

    Whips, curses; these must answer those!
      For in this UNION you have set
    Two kinds of men in adverse rows,
      Each loathing each; and all forget
    The seven wounds in Christ's body fair,
    While HE sees gaping everywhere
      Our countless wounds that pay no debt.

    XXXV.

    Our wounds are different. Your white men
      Are, after all, not gods indeed,
    Nor able to make Christs again
      Do good with bleeding. _We_ who bleed
    (Stand off!) we help not in our loss!
    _We_ are too heavy for our cross,
      And fall and crush you and your seed.

    XXXVI.

    I fall, I swoon! I look at the sky.
      The clouds are breaking on my brain
    I am floated along, as if I should die
      Of liberty's exquisite pain.
    In the name of the white child waiting for me
    In the death-dark where we may kiss and agree,
    White men, I leave you all curse-free
      In my broken heart's disdain!




_THE CRY OF THE CHILDREN._

    ~"Pheu, pheu, ti prosderkesthe m' ommasin, tekna?"~

    --Medea.


    I.

    Do ye hear the children weeping, O my brothers,
        Ere the sorrow comes with years?
    They are leaning their young heads against their mothers.
        And _that_ cannot stop their tears.
    The young lambs are bleating in the meadows,
      The young birds are chirping in the nest,
    The young fawns are playing with the shadows,
      The young flowers are blowing toward the west--
    But the young, young children, O my brothers,
        They are weeping bitterly!
    They are weeping in the playtime of the others,
        In the country of the free.

    II.

    Do you question the young children in the sorrow
        Why their tears are falling so?
    The old man may weep for his to-morrow
        Which is lost in Long Ago;
    The old tree is leafless in the forest,
      The old year is ending in the frost,
    The old wound, if stricken, is the sorest,
      The old hope is hardest to be lost:
    But the young, young children, O my brothers,
        Do you ask them why they stand
    Weeping sore before the bosoms of their mothers,
        In our happy Fatherland?

    III.

    They look up with their pale and sunken faces,
        And their looks are sad to see,
    For the man's hoary anguish draws and presses
        Down the cheeks of infancy;
    "Your old earth," they say, "is very dreary,
      Our young feet," they say, "are very weak;
    Few paces have we taken, yet are weary--
      Our grave-rest is very far to seek:
    Ask the aged why they weep, and not the children,
        For the outside earth is cold,
    And we young ones stand without, in our bewildering,
        And the graves are for the old."

    IV.

    "True," say the children, "it may happen
        That we die before our time:
    Little Alice died last year, her grave is shapen
        Like a snowball, in the rime.
    We looked into the pit prepared to take her:
      Was no room for any work in the close clay!
    From the sleep wherein she lieth none will wake her,
      Crying, 'Get up, little Alice! it is day.'
    If you listen by that grave, in sun and shower,
      With your ear down, little Alice never cries;
    Could we see her face, be sure we should not know her,
      For the smile has time for growing in her eyes:
    And merry go her moments, lulled and stilled in
        The shroud by the kirk-chime.
    It is good when it happens," say the children,
        "That we die before our time."

    V.

    Alas, alas, the children! they are seeking
        Death in life, as best to have:
    They are binding up their hearts away from breaking,
        With a cerement from the grave.
    Go out, children, from the mine and from the city,
      Sing out, children, as the little thrushes do;
    Pluck your handfuls of the meadow-cowslips pretty,
      Laugh aloud, to feel your fingers let them through!
    But they answer, "Are your cowslips of the meadows
        Like our weeds anear the mine?
    Leave us quiet in the dark of the coal-shadows,
        From your pleasures fair and fine!

    VI.

    "For oh," say the children, "we are weary,
        And we cannot run or leap;
    If we cared for any meadows, it were merely
        To drop down in them and sleep.
    Our knees tremble sorely in the stooping,
      We fall upon our faces, trying to go;
    And, underneath our heavy eyelids drooping,
      The reddest flower would look as pale as snow.
    For, all day, we drag our burden tiring
        Through the coal-dark, underground;
    Or, all day, we drive the wheels of iron
        In the factories, round and round.

    VII.

    "For all day the wheels are droning, turning;
        Their wind comes in our faces,
    Till our hearts turn, our heads with pulses burning,
        And the walls turn in their places:
    Turns the sky in the high window, blank and reeling,
      Turns the long light that drops adown the wall,
    Turn the black flies that crawl along the ceiling:
      All are turning, all the day, and we with all.
    And all day the iron wheels are droning,
        And sometimes we could pray,
    'O ye wheels' (breaking out in a mad moaning),
        'Stop! be silent for to-day!'"

    VIII.

    Ay, be silent! Let them hear each other breathing
        For a moment, mouth to mouth!
    Let them touch each other's hands, in a fresh wreathing
        Of their tender human youth!
    Let them feel that this cold metallic motion
      Is not all the life God fashions or reveals:
    Let them prove their living souls against the notion
      That they live in you, or under you, O wheels!
    Still, all day, the iron wheels go onward,
        Grinding life down from its mark;
    And the children's souls, which God is calling sunward,
        Spin on blindly in the dark.

    IX.

    Now tell the poor young children, O my brothers,
        To look up to Him and pray;
    So the blessed One who blesseth all the others,
        Will bless them another day.
    They answer, "Who is God that He should hear us,
      While the rushing of the iron wheels is stirred?
    When we sob aloud, the human creatures near us
      Pass by, hearing not, or answer not a word.
    And _we_ hear not (for the wheels in their resounding)
        Strangers speaking at the door:
    Is it likely God, with angels singing round Him,
        Hears our weeping any more?

    X.

    "Two words, indeed, of praying we remember,
        And at midnight's hour of harm,
    'Our Father,' looking upward in the chamber,
        We say softly for a charm.[6]
    We know no other words except 'Our Father,'
      And we think that, in some pause of angels' song,
    God may pluck them with the silence sweet to gather,
      And hold both within His right hand which is strong.
    'Our Father!' If He heard us, He would surely
        (For they call Him good and mild)
    Answer, smiling down the steep world very purely,
        'Come and rest with me, my child.'

    XI.

    "But, no!" say the children, weeping faster,
        "He is speechless as a stone:
    And they tell us, of His image is the master
        Who commands us to work on.
    Go to!" say the children,--"up in Heaven,
      Dark, wheel-like, turning clouds are all we find.
    Do not mock us; grief has made us unbelieving:
      We look up for God, but tears have made us blind."
    Do you hear the children weeping and disproving,
        O my brothers, what ye preach?
    For God's possible is taught by His world's loving,
        And the children doubt of each.

    XII.

    And well may the children weep before you!
        They are weary ere they run;
    They have never seen the sunshine, nor the glory
        Which is brighter than the sun.
    They know the grief of man, without its wisdom;
      They sink in man's despair, without its calm;
    Are slaves, without the liberty in Christdom,
      Are martyrs, by the pang without the palm:
    Are worn as if with age, yet unretrievingly
        The harvest of its memories cannot reap,--
    Are orphans of the earthly love and heavenly.
        Let them weep! let them weep!

    XIII.

    They look up with their pale and sunken faces,
        And their look is dread to see,
    For they mind you of their angels in high places,
        With eyes turned on Deity.
    "How long," they say, "how long, O cruel nation,
      Will you stand, to move the world, on a child's heart,--
    Stifle down with a mailed heel its palpitation,
      And tread onward to your throne amid the mart?
    Our blood splashes upward, O gold-heaper,
        And your purple shows your path!
    But the child's sob in the silence curses deeper
        Than the strong man in his wrath."

FOOTNOTES:

[6] A fact rendered pathetically historical by Mr. Horne's report of
his Commission. The name of the poet of "Orion" and "Cosmo de' Medici"
has, however, a change of associations, and comes in time to remind me
that we have some noble poetic heat of literature still,--however open
to the reproach of being somewhat gelid in our humanity--1844.




_A CHILD ASLEEP._


    I.

        How he sleepeth, having drunken
          Weary childhood's mandragore!
        From its pretty eyes have sunken
          Pleasures to make room for more;
    Sleeping near the withered nosegay which he pulled the day before.

    II.

        Nosegays! leave them for the waking;
          Throw them earthward where they grew;
        Dim are such beside the breaking
          Amaranths he looks unto:
    Folded eyes see brighter colours than the open ever do.

    III.

        Heaven-flowers, rayed by shadows golden
          From the palms they sprang beneath,
        Now perhaps divinely holden,
          Swing against him in a wreath:
    We may think so from the quickening of his bloom and of his breath.

    IV.

        Vision unto vision calleth
          While the young child dreameth on:
        Fair, O dreamer, thee befalleth
          With the glory thou hast won!
    Darker wast thou in the garden yestermorn by summer sun.

    V.

        We should see the spirits ringing
          Round thee, were the clouds away:
        'T is the child-heart draws them, singing
          In the silent-seeming clay--
    Singing! stars that seem the mutest go in music all the way.

    VI.

        As the moths around a taper,
          As the bees around a rose,
        As the gnats around a vapour,
          So the spirits group and close
    Round about a holy childhood as if drinking its repose.

    VII.

        Shapes of brightness overlean thee,
          Flash their diadems of youth
        On the ringlets which half screen thee,
          While thou smilest ... not in sooth
    _Thy_ smile, but the overfair one, dropt from some etherial mouth.

    VIII.

        Haply it is angels' duty,
          During slumber, shade by shade
        To fine down this childish beauty
          To the thing it must be made
    Ere the world shall bring it praises, or the tomb shall see it fade.

    IX.

        Softly, softly! make no noises!
          Now he lieth dead and dumb;
        Now he hears the angels' voices
          Folding silence in the room
    Now he muses deep the meaning of the Heaven-words as they come.

    X.

        Speak not! he is consecrated;
          Breathe no breath across his eyes:
        Lifted up and separated
          On the hand of God he lies
    In a sweetness beyond touching, held in cloistral sanctities.

    XI.

        Could ye bless him, father--mother,
          Bless the dimple in his cheek?
        Dare ye look at one another
          And the benediction speak?
    Would ye not break out in weeping and confess yourselves too weak?

    XII.

        He is harmless, ye are sinful;
          Ye are troubled, he at ease;
        From his slumber virtue winful
          Floweth outward with increase.
    Dare not bless him! but be blessed by his peace, and go in peace.




_THE FOURFOLD ASPECT._


    I.

      When ye stood up in the house
        With your little childish feet,
      And, in touching Life's first shows,
        First the touch of Love did meet,--
      Love and Nearness seeming one,
        By the heartlight cast before,
      And of all Beloveds, none
        Standing farther than the door;
      Not a name being dear to thought,
        With its owner beyond call;
      Not a face, unless it brought
        Its own shadow to the wall;
      When the worst recorded change
        Was of apple dropt from bough,
      When love's sorrow seemed more strange
        Than love's treason can seem now;--
      Then, the Loving took you up
        Soft, upon their elder knees,
      Telling why the statues droop
        Underneath the churchyard trees,
      And how ye must lie beneath them
        Through the winters long and deep,
      Till the last trump overbreathe them,
        And ye smile out of your sleep.
    Oh, ye lifted up your head, and it seemed as if they said
        A tale of fairy ships
          With a swan-wing for a sail;
        Oh, ye kissed their loving lips
          For the merry merry tale--
      So carelessly ye thought upon the Dead!

    II.

      Soon ye read in solemn stories
        Of the men of long ago,
      Of the pale bewildering glories
        Shining farther than we know;
      Of the heroes with the laurel,
        Of the poets with the bay,
      Of the two worlds' earnest quarrel
        For that beauteous Helena;
      How Achilles at the portal
        Of the tent heard footsteps nigh,
      And his strong heart, half-immortal,
        Met the _keitai_ with a cry;
      How Ulysses left the sunlight
        For the pale eidola race
      Blank and passive through the dun light,
        Staring blindly in his face;
      How that true wife said to Poetus,
        With calm smile and wounded heart,
      "Sweet, it hurts not!" How Admetus
        Saw his blessed one depart;
      How King Arthur proved his mission,
        And Sir Roland wound his horn,
      And at Sangreal's moony vision
        Swords did bristle round like corn.
    Oh, ye lifted up your head, and it seemed, the while ye read,
        That this Death, then, must be found
        A Valhalla for the crowned,
          The heroic who prevail:
        None, be sure can enter in
        Far below a paladin
          Of a noble noble tale--
      So awfully ye thought upon the Dead!

    III.

      Ay, but soon ye woke up shrieking,
        As a child that wakes at night
      From a dream of sisters speaking
        In a garden's summer-light,--
      That wakes, starting up and bounding,
        In a lonely lonely bed,
      With a wall of darkness round him,
        Stifling black about his head!
      And the full sense of your mortal
        Rushed upon you deep and loud,
      And ye heard the thunder hurtle
        From the silence of the cloud.
      Funeral-torches at your gateway
        Threw a dreadful light within.
      All things changed: you rose up straightway,
        And saluted Death and Sin.
      Since, your outward man has rallied,
        And your eye and voice grown bold;
      Yet the Sphinx of Life stands pallid,
        With her saddest secret told.
      Happy places have grown holy:
        If ye went where once ye went,
      Only tears would fall down slowly,
        As at solemn sacrament.
      Merry books, once read for pastime,
        If ye dared to read again,
      Only memories of the last time
        Would swim darkly up the brain.
      Household names, which used to flutter
        Through your laughter unawares,--
      God's Divinest ye could utter
        With less trembling in your prayers.
    Ye have dropt adown your head, and it seems as if ye tread
        On your own hearts in the path
        Ye are called to in His wrath,
          And your prayers go up in wail
        --"Dost Thou see, then, all our loss,
        O Thou agonized on cross?
          Art thou reading all its tale?"
      So mournfully ye think upon the Dead!

    IV.

      Pray, pray, thou who also weepest,
        And the drops will slacken so.
      Weep, weep, and the watch thou keepest
        With a quicker count will go.
      Think: the shadow on the dial
        For the nature most undone,
      Marks the passing of the trial,
        Proves the presence of the sun.
      Look, look up, in starry passion,
        To the throne above the spheres:
      Learn: the spirit's gravitation
        Still must differ from the tear's.
      Hope: with all the strength thou usest
        In embracing thy despair.
      Love: the earthly love thou losest
        Shall return to thee more fair.
      Work: make clear the forest-tangles
        Of the wildest stranger-land
      Trust: the blessed deathly angels
        Whisper, "Sabbath hours at hand!"
      By the heart's wound when most gory,
        By the longest agony,
      Smile! Behold in sudden glory
        The TRANSFIGURED smiles on _thee_!
    And ye lifted up your head, and it seemed as if He said,
        "My Beloved, is it so?
        Have ye tasted of my woe?
          Of my Heaven ye shall not fail!"
        He stands brightly where the shade is,
        With the keys of Death and Hades,
          And there, ends the mournful tale--
      So hopefully ye think upon the Dead!




_NIGHT AND THE MERRY MAN._


NIGHT.

    'Neath my moon what doest thou,
    With a somewhat paler brow
    Than she giveth to the ocean?
    He, without a pulse or motion,
    Muttering low before her stands,
    Lifting his invoking hands
    Like a seer before a sprite,
    To catch her oracles of light:
    But thy soul out-trembles now
    Many pulses on thy brow.
    Where be all thy laughters clear,
    Others laughed alone to hear?
    Where thy quaint jests, said for fame?
    Where thy dances, mixed with game?
    Where thy festive companies,
    Mooned o'er with ladies' eyes
    All more bright for thee, I trow?
    'Neath my moon what doest thou?


THE MERRY MAN.

    I am digging my warm heart
    Till I find its coldest part;
    I am digging wide and low,
    Further than a spade will go,
    Till that, when the pit is deep
    And large enough, I there may heap
    All my present pain and past
    Joy, dead things that look aghast
    By the daylight: now 't is done.
    Throw them in, by one and one!
    I must laugh, at rising sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Memories--of fancy's golden
    Treasures which my hands have holden,
    Till the chillness made them ache;
    Of childhood's hopes that used to wake
    If birds were in a singing strain,
    And for less cause, sleep again;
    Of the moss-seat in the wood
    Where I trysted solitude;
    Of the hill-top where the wind
    Used to follow me behind,
    Then in sudden rush to blind
    Both my glad eyes with my hair,
    Taken gladly in the snare;
    Of the climbing up the rocks,
    Of the playing 'neath the oaks
    Which retain beneath them now
    Only shadow of the bough;
    Of the lying on the grass
    While the clouds did overpass,
    Only they, so lightly driven,
    Seeming betwixt me and Heaven;
    Of the little prayers serene,
    Murmuring of earth and sin;
    Of large-leaved philosophy
    Leaning from my childish knee;
    Of poetic book sublime,
    Soul-kissed for the first dear time,
    Greek or English, ere I knew
    Life was not a poem too:--
    Throw them in, by one and one!
    I must laugh, at rising sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

    --Of the glorious ambitions
    Yet unquenched by their fruitions
    Of the reading out the nights;
    Of the straining at mad heights;
    Of achievements, less descried
    By a dear few than magnified;
    Of praises from the many earned
    When praise from love was undiscerned;
    Of the sweet reflecting gladness
    Softened by itself to sadness:--
    Throw them in, by one and one!
    I must laugh, at rising sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

    What are these? more, more than these!
    Throw in dearer memories!--
    Of voices whereof but to speak
    Makes mine own all sunk and weak;
    Of smiles the thought of which is sweeping
    All my soul to floods of weeping;
    Of looks whose absence fain would weigh
    My looks to the ground for aye;
    Of clasping hands--ah me, I wring
    Mine, and in a tremble fling
    Downward, downward all this paining!
    Partings with the sting remaining,
    Meetings with a deeper throe
    Since the joy is ruined so,
    Changes with a fiery burning,
    (Shadows upon all the turning,)
    Thoughts of ... with a storm they came,
    _Them_ I have not breath to name:
    Downward, downward be they cast
    In the pit! and now at last
    My work beneath the moon is done,
    And I shall laugh, at rising sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

    But let me pause or ere I cover
    All my treasures darkly over:
    I will speak not in thine ears,
    Only tell my beaded tears
    Silently, most silently.
    When the last is calmly told,
    Let that same moist rosary
    With the rest sepulchred be,
    Finished now! The darksome mould
    Sealeth up the darksome pit.
    I will lay no stone on it,
    Grasses I will sow instead,
    Fit for Queen Titania's tread;
    Flowers, encoloured with the sun,
    And ~ai ai~ written upon none;
    Thus, whenever saileth by
    The Lady World of dainty eye,
    Not a grief shall here remain,
    Silken shoon to damp or stain:
    And while she lisps, "I have not seen
    Any place more smooth and clean" ...
    Here she cometh!--Ha, ha!--who
    Laughs as loud as I can do?




_EARTH AND HER PRAISERS._


    I.

            The Earth is old;
    Six thousand winters make her heart a-cold;
    The sceptre slanteth from her palsied hold.
    She saith, "'Las me! God's word that I was 'good'
          Is taken back to heaven,
    From whence when any sound comes, I am riven
    By some sharp bolt; and now no angel would
    Descend with sweet dew-silence on my mountains,
    To glorify the lovely river fountains
          That gush along their side:
    I see--O weary change!--I see instead
          This human wrath and pride,
    These thrones and tombs, judicial wrong and blood,
    And bitter words are poured upon mine head--
    'O Earth! thou art a stage for tricks unholy,
    A church for most remorseful melancholy;
    Thou art so spoilt, we should forget we had
    An Eden in thee, wert thou not so sad!'
    Sweet children, I am old! ye, every one,
    Do keep me from a portion of my sun.
        Give praise in change for brightness!
    That I may shake my hills in infiniteness
    Of breezy laughter, as in youthful mirth,
    To hear Earth's sons and daughters praising Earth."

    II.

      Whereupon a child began
      With spirit running up to man
      As by angels' shining ladder,
      (May he find no cloud above!)
      Seeming he had ne'er been sadder
        All his days than now,
      Sitting in the chestnut grove,
      With that joyous overflow
      Of smiling from his mouth o'er brow
      And cheek and chin, as if the breeze
      Leaning tricksy from the trees
      To part his golden hairs, had blown
      Into an hundred smiles that one.

    III.

    "O rare, rare Earth!" he saith,
      "I will praise thee presently;
    Not to-day; I have no breath:
      I have hunted squirrels three--
    Two ran down in the furzy hollow
    Where I could not see nor follow,
    One sits at the top of the filbert-tree,
    With a yellow nut and a mock at me:
      Presently it shall be done!
    When I see which way these two have run,
    When the mocking one at the filbert-top
    Shall leap a-down and beside me stop,
      Then, rare Earth, rare Earth,
    Will I pause, having known thy worth,
      To say all good of thee!"

    IV.

    Next a lover,--with a dream
    'Neath his waking eyelids hidden,
    And a frequent sigh unbidden,
    And an idlesse all the day
    Beside a wandering stream,
    And a silence that is made
    Of a word he dares not say,--
    Shakes slow his pensive head:
      "Earth, Earth!" saith he,
    "If spirits, like thy roses, grew
    On one stalk, and winds austere
    Could but only blow them near,
      To share each other's dew;--
    If, when summer rains agree
    To beautify thy hills, I knew
    Looking off them I might see
      Some one very beauteous too,--
        Then Earth," saith he,
    "I would praise ... nay, nay--not _thee_!"

    V.

    Will the pedant name her next?
    Crabbed with a crabbed text
    Sits he in his study nook,
    With his elbow on a book,
    And with stately crossed knees,
    And a wrinkle deeply thrid
    Through his lowering brow,
    Caused by making proofs enow
    That Plato in "Parmenides"
    Meant the same Spinoza did,--
    Or, that an hundred of the groping
    Like himself, had made one Homer,
    _Homeros_ being a misnomer
    What hath _he_ to do with praise
    Of Earth or aught? Whene'er the sloping
    Sunbeams through his window daze
    His eyes off from the learned phrase,
    Straightway he draws close the curtain.
    May abstraction keep him dumb!
    Were his lips to ope, 't is certain
    "_Derivatum est_" would come.

    VI.

    Then a mourner moveth pale
    In a silence full of wail,
    Raising not his sunken head
    Because he wandered last that way
    With that one beneath the clay:
    Weeping not, because that one,
    The only one who would have said
    "Cease to weep, beloved!" has gone
    Whence returneth comfort none.
    The silence breaketh suddenly,--
    "Earth, I praise thee!" crieth he,
    "Thou hast a grave for also _me_."

    VII.

    Ha, a poet! know him by
    The ecstasy-dilated eye,
    Not uncharged with tears that ran
    Upward from his heart of man;
    By the cheek, from hour to hour,
    Kindled bright or sunken wan
    With a sense of lonely power;
    By the brow uplifted higher
    Than others, for more low declining
    By the lip which words of fire
    Overboiling have burned white
    While they gave the nations light:
    Ay, in every time and place
    Ye may know the poet's face
      By the shade or shining.

    VIII.

    'Neath a golden cloud he stands,
    Spreading his impassioned hands.
    "O God's Earth!" he saith, "the sign
    From the Father-soul to mine
    Of all beauteous mysteries,
    Of all perfect images
    Which, divine in His divine,
    In my human only are
    Very excellent and fair!
    Think not, Earth, that I would raise
    Weary forehead in thy praise,
    (Weary, that I cannot go
    Farther from thy region low,)
    If were struck no richer meanings
    From thee than thyself. The leaning
    Of the close trees o'er the brim
    Of a sunshine-haunted stream
    Have a sound beneath their leaves,
      Not of wind, not of wind,
    Which the poet's voice achieves:
    The faint mountains, heaped behind,
    Have a falling on their tops,
      Not of dew, not of dew,
    Which the poet's fancy drops:
    Viewless things his eyes can view
    Driftings of his dream do light
    All the skies by day and night,
    And the seas that deepest roll
    Carry murmurs of his soul.
    'Earth, I praise thee! praise thou _me_!
    God perfecteth his creation
    With this recipient poet-passion,
    And makes the beautiful to be.
    I praise thee, O beloved sign,
    From the God-soul unto mine!
    Praise me, that I cast on thee
    The cunning sweet interpretation,
    The help and glory and dilation
      Of mine immortality!"

    IX.

    There was silence. None did dare
    To use again the spoken air
    Of that far-charming voice, until
    A Christian resting on the hill,
    With a thoughtful smile subdued
    (Seeming learnt in solitude)
    Which a weeper might have viewed
    Without new tears, did softly say,
    And looked up unto heaven alway
    While he praised the Earth--
                                 "O Earth,
    I count the praises thou art worth,
    By thy waves that move aloud,
    By thy hills against the cloud,
    By thy valleys warm and green,
    By the copses' elms between,
    By their birds which, like a sprite
    Scattered by a strong delight
    Into fragments musical,
    Stir and sing in every bush;
    By thy silver founts that fall,
    As if to entice the stars at night
    To thine heart; by grass and rush,
    And little weeds the children pull,
    Mistook for flowers!
                        --Oh, beautiful
    Art thou, Earth, albeit worse
    Than in heaven is called good!
    Good to us, that we may know
    Meekly from thy good to go;
    While the holy, crying Blood
    Puts its music kind and low
    'Twixt such ears as are not dull,
      And thine ancient curse!

    X.

    "Praised be the mosses soft
    In thy forest pathways oft,
    And the thorns, which make us think
    Of the thornless river-brink
      Where the ransomed tread:
    Praised be thy sunny gleams,
    And the storm, that worketh dreams
      Of calm unfinished:
    Praised be thine active days,
    And thy night-time's solemn need,
    When in God's dear book we read
      _No night shall be therein_:
    Praised be thy dwellings warm
    By household faggot's cheerful blaze,
    Where, to hear of pardoned sin,
    Pauseth oft the merry din,
    Save the babe's upon the arm
    Who croweth to the crackling wood:
    Yea, and, better understood,
    Praised be thy dwellings cold,
    Hid beneath the churchyard mould,
    Where the bodies of the saints
    Separate from earthly taints
    Lie asleep, in blessing bound,
    Waiting for the trumpet's sound
    To free them into blessing;--none
    Weeping more beneath the sun,
    Though dangerous words of human love
    Be graven very near, above.

    XI.

    "Earth, we Christians praise thee thus,
    Even for the change that comes
    With a grief from thee to us:
    For thy cradles and thy tombs,
    For the pleasant corn and wine
    And summer-heat; and also for
    The frost upon the sycamore
      And hail upon the vine!"




_THE VIRGIN MARY TO THE CHILD JESUS._

    But see the Virgin blest
    Hath laid her babe to rest.

    MILTON'S _Hymn on the Nativity_.


    I.

          Sleep, sleep, mine Holy One!
    My flesh, my Lord!--what name? I do not know
    A name that seemeth not too high or low,
          Too far from me or heaven:
    My Jesus, _that_ is best! that word being given
    By the majestic angel whose command
    Was softly as a man's beseeching said,
    When I and all the earth appeared to stand
          In the great overflow
    Of light celestial from his wings and head.
          Sleep, sleep, my saving One!

    II.

    And art Thou come for saving, baby-browed
    And speechless Being--art Thou come for saving?
    The palm that grows beside our door is bowed
    By treadings of the low wind from the south,
    A restless shadow through the chamber waving:
    Upon its bough a bird sings in the sun,
    But Thou, with that close slumber on Thy mouth,
    Dost seem of wind and sun already weary.
    Art come for saving, O my weary One?

    III.

    Perchance this sleep that shutteth out the dreary
    Earth-sounds and motions, opens on Thy soul
        High dreams on fire with God;
    High songs that make the pathways where they roll
    More bright than stars do theirs; and visions new
    Of Thine eternal Nature's old abode.
        Suffer this mother's kiss,
        Best thing that earthly is,
    To glide the music and the glory through,
    Nor narrow in Thy dream the broad upliftings
        Of any seraph wing.
    Thus noiseless, thus. Sleep, sleep my dreaming One!

    IV.

    The slumber of His lips meseems to run
    Through _my_ lips to mine heart, to all its shiftings
    Of sensual life, bringing contrariousness
    In a great calm. I feel I could lie down
    As Moses did, and die,[7]--and then live most.
    I am 'ware of you, heavenly Presences,
    That stand with your peculiar light unlost,
    Each forehead with a high thought for a crown,
    Unsunned i' the sunshine! I am 'ware. Ye throw
    No shade against the wall! How motionless
    Ye round me with your living statuary,
    While through your whiteness, in and outwardly,
    Continual thoughts of God appear to go,
    Like light's soul in itself. I bear, I bear
    To look upon the dropt lids of your eyes,
    Though their external shining testifies
    To that beatitude within which were
    Enough to blast an eagle at his sun:
    I fall not on my sad clay face before ye,--
          I look on His. I know
    My spirit which dilateth with the woe
            Of His mortality,
            May well contain your glory.
          Yea, drop your lids more low.
    Ye are but fellow-worshippers with me!
          Sleep, sleep, my worshipped One!

    V.

    We sate among the stalls at Bethlehem;
    The dumb kine from their fodder turning them,
        Softened their horned faces
        To almost human gazes
        Toward the newly Born:
    The simple shepherds from the star-lit brooks
        Brought visionary looks,
    As yet in their astonied hearing rung
        The strange sweet angel-tongue:
    The magi of the East, in sandals worn,
        Knelt reverent, sweeping round,
      With long pale beards, their gifts upon the ground,
        The incense, myrrh and gold
    These baby hands were impotent to hold:
    So let all earthlies and celestials wait
        Upon Thy royal state.
        Sleep, sleep, my kingly One!

    VI.

    I am not proud--meek angels, ye invest
    New meeknesses to hear such utterance rest
    On mortal lips,--"I am not proud"--_not proud!_
    Albeit in my flesh God sent His Son,
    Albeit over Him my head is bowed
    As others bow before Him, still mine heart
    Bows lower than their knees. O centuries
    That roll in vision your futurities
          My future grave athwart,--
    Whose murmurs seem to reach me while I keep
          Watch o'er this sleep,--
    Say of me as the Heavenly said--"Thou art
    The blessedest of women!"--blessedest,
    Not holiest, not noblest, no high name
    Whose height misplaced may pierce me like a shame
    When I sit meek in heaven!
                                For me, for me,
    God knows that I am feeble like the rest!
    I often wandered forth, more child than maiden
    Among the midnight hills of Galilee
          Whose summits looked heaven-laden,
    Listening to silence as it seemed to be
    God's voice, so soft yet strong, so fain to press
    Upon my heart as heaven did on the height,
    And waken up its shadows by a light,
    And show its vileness by a holiness.
    Then I knelt down most silent like the night,
          Too self-renounced for fears,
    Raising my small face to the boundless blue
    Whose stars did mix and tremble in my tears:
    God heard _them_ falling after, with His dew.

    VII.

    So, seeing my corruption, can I see
    This Incorruptible now born of me,
    This fair new Innocence no sun did chance
    To shine on, (for even Adam was no child,)
    Created from my nature all defiled,
    This mystery, from out mine ignorance,--
    Nor feel the blindness, stain, corruption, more
    Than others do, or _I_ did heretofore?
    Can hands wherein such burden pure has been,
    Not open with the cry "unclean, unclean,"
    More oft than any else beneath the skies?
          Ah King, ah, Christ, ah son!
    The kine, the shepherds, the abased wise
          Must all less lowly wait
          Than I, upon Thy state.
        Sleep, sleep, my kingly One!

    VIII.

    Art Thou a King, then? Come, His universe,
    Come, crown me Him a King!
    Pluck rays from all such stars as never fling
      Their light where fell a curse,
    And make a crowning for this kingly brow!--
    What is my word? Each empyreal star
          Sits in a sphere afar
          In shining ambuscade:
          The child-brow, crowned by none,
          Keeps its unchildlike shade.
          Sleep, sleep, my crownless One!

    IX.

    Unchildlike shade! No other babe doth wear
    An aspect very sorrowful, as Thou.
    No small babe-smiles my watching heart has seen
    To float like speech the speechless lips between,
    No dovelike cooing in the golden air,
    No quick short joys of leaping babyhood.
          Alas, our earthly good
    In heaven thought evil, seems too good for Thee;
          Yet, sleep, my weary One!

    X.

    And then the drear sharp tongue of prophecy,
    With the dread sense of things which shall be done,
    Doth smite me inly, like a sword: a sword?
    _That_ "smites the Shepherd." Then, I think aloud
    The words "despised,"--"rejected,"--every word
    Recoiling into darkness as I view
          The DARLING on my knee.
    Bright angels,--move not--lest ye stir the cloud
    Betwixt my soul and His futurity!
    I must not die, with mother's work to do,
          And could not live-and see.

    XI.

          It is enough to bear
          This image still and fair,
          This holier in sleep
          Than a saint at prayer,
          This aspect of a child
          Who never sinned or smiled;
          This Presence in an infant's face;
          This sadness most like love,
          This love than love more deep,
          This weakness like omnipotence
          It is so strong to move.
          Awful is this watching place,
          Awful what I see from hence--
          A king, without regalia,
          A God, without the thunder,
          A child, without the heart for play;
          Ay, a Creator, rent asunder
          From His first glory and cast away
          On His own world, for me alone
      To hold in hands created, crying--SON!

    XII.

          That tear fell not on Thee,
    Beloved, yet thou stirrest in thy slumber!
    THOU, stirring not for glad sounds out of number
    Which through the vibratory palm-trees run
          From summer-wind and bird,
          So quickly hast thou heard
          A tear fall silently?
          Wak'st thou, O loving One?--

FOOTNOTES:

[7] It is a Jewish tradition that Moses died of the kisses of God's
lips.




_AN ISLAND._

    All goeth but Goddis will.--OLD POET.


    I.

    My dream is of an island-place
      Which distant seas keep lonely,
    A little island on whose face
      The stars are watchers only:
    Those bright still stars! they need not seem
    Brighter or stiller in my dream.

    II.

    An island full of hills and dells,
      All rumpled and uneven
    With green recesses, sudden swells,
      And odorous valleys driven
    So deep and straight that always there
    The wind is cradled to soft air.

    III.

    Hills running up to heaven for light
      Through woods that half-way ran,
    As if the wild earth mimicked right
      The wilder heart of man:
    Only it shall be greener far
    And gladder than hearts ever are.

    IV.

    More like, perhaps, that mountain piece
      Of Dante's paradise,
    Disrupt to an hundred hills like these,
      In falling from the skies;
    Bringing within it, all the roots
    Of heavenly trees and flowers and fruits:

    V.

    For--saving where the grey rocks strike
      Their javelins up the azure,
    Or where deep fissures miser-like
      Hoard up some fountain treasure,
    (And e'en in them, stoop down and hear,
    Leaf sounds with water in your ear,--)

    VI.

    The place is all awave with trees,
      Limes, myrtles purple-beaded,
    Acacias having drunk the lees
      Of the night-dew, faint-headed,
    And wan grey olive-woods which seem
    The fittest foliage for a dream.

    VII.

    Trees, trees on all sides! they combine
      Their plumy shades to throw,
    Through whose clear fruit and blossom fine
      Whene'er the sun may go,
    The ground beneath he deeply stains,
    As passing through cathedral panes.

    VIII.

    But little needs this earth of ours
      That shining from above her,
    When many Pleiades of flowers
      (Not one lost) star her over,
    The rays of their unnumbered hues
    Being all refracted by the dews.

    IX.

    Wide-petalled plants that boldly drink
      The Amreeta of the sky,
    Shut bells that dull with rapture sink,
      And lolling buds, half shy;
    I cannot count them, but between
    Is room for grass and mosses green,

    X.

    And brooks, that glass in different strengths
      All colours in disorder,
    Or, gathering up their silver lengths
      Beside their winding border,
    Sleep, haunted through the slumber hidden,
    By lilies white as dreams in Eden.

    XI.

    Nor think each arched tree with each
      Too closely interlaces
    To admit of vistas out of reach,
      And broad moon-lighted places
    Upon whose sward the antlered deer
    May view their double image clear.

    XII.

    For all this island's creature-full,
      (Kept happy not by halves)
    Mild cows, that at the vine-wreaths pull,
      Then low back at their calves
    With tender lowings, to approve
    The warm mouths milking them for love.

    XIII.

    Free gamesome horses, antelopes,
      And harmless leaping leopards,
    And buffaloes upon the slopes,
      And sheep unruled by shepherds:
    Hares, lizards, hedgehogs, badgers, mice,
    Snakes, squirrels, frogs, and butterflies.

    XIV.

    And birds that live there in a crowd,
      Horned owls, rapt nightingales,
    Larks bold with heaven, and peacocks proud,
      Self-sphered in those grand tails;
    All creatures glad and safe, I deem
    No guns nor springes in my dream!

    XV.

    The island's edges are a-wing
      With trees that overbranch
    The sea with song-birds welcoming
      The curlews to green change;
    And doves from half-closed lids espy
    The red and purple fish go by.

    XVI.

    One dove is answering in trust
      The water every minute,
    Thinking so soft a murmur must
      Have her mate's cooing in it:
    So softly doth earth's beauty round
    Infuse itself in ocean's sound.

    XVII.

    My sanguine soul bounds forwarder
      To meet the bounding waves;
    Beside them straightway I repair,
      To live within the caves:
    And near me two or three may dwell
    Whom dreams fantastic please as well.

    XVIII.

    Long winding caverns, glittering far
      Into a crystal distance!
    Through clefts of which shall many a star
      Shine clear without resistance,
    And carry down its rays the smell
    Of flowers above invisible.

    XIX.

    I said that two or three might choose
      Their dwelling near mine own:
    Those who would change man's voice and use,
      For Nature's way and tone--
    Man's veering heart and careless eyes,
    For Nature's steadfast sympathies.

    XX.

    Ourselves, to meet her faithfulness,
      Shall play a faithful part;
    Her beautiful shall ne'er address
      The monstrous at our heart:
    Her musical shall ever touch
    Something within us also such.

    XXI.

    Yet shall she not our mistress live,
      As doth the moon of ocean,
    Though gently as the moon she give
      Our thoughts a light and motion:
    More like a harp of many lays,
    Moving its master while he plays.

    XXII.

    No sod in all that island doth
      Yawn open for the dead;
    No wind hath borne a traitor's oath;
      No earth, a mourner's tread;
    We cannot say by stream or shade,
    "I suffered _here_,--was _here_ betrayed."

    XXIII.

    Our only "farewell" we shall laugh
      To shifting cloud or hour,
    And use our only epitaph
      To some bud turned a flower:
    Our only tears shall serve to prove
    Excess in pleasure or in love.

    XXIV.

    Our fancies shall their plumage catch
      From fairest island-birds,
    Whose eggs let young ones out at hatch,
      Born singing! then our words
    Unconsciously shall take the dyes
    Of those prodigious fantasies.

    XXV.

    Yea, soon, no consonant unsmooth
      Our smile-tuned lips shall reach;
    Sounds sweet as Hellas spake in youth
      Shall glide into our speech:
    (What music, certes, can you find
    As soft as voices which are kind?)

    XXVI.

    And often, by the joy without
      And in us, overcome,
    We, through our musing, shall let float
      Such poems,--sitting dumb,--
    As Pindar might have writ if he
      Had tended sheep in Arcady;

    XXVII.

    Or AEschylus--the pleasant fields
      He died in, longer knowing;
    Or Homer, had men's sins and shields
      Been lost in Meles flowing;
    Or Poet Plato, had the undim
    Unsetting Godlight broke on him.

    XXVIII.

    Choose me the cave most worthy choice,
      To make a place for prayer,
    And I will choose a praying voice
      To pour our spirits there:
    How silverly the echoes run!
    _Thy will be done,--thy will be done._

    XXIX.

    Gently yet strangely uttered words!
      They lift me from my dream;
    The island fadeth with its swards
      That did no more than seem:
    The streams are dry, no sun could find--
    The fruits are fallen, without wind.

    XXX.

    So oft the doing of God's will
      Our foolish wills undoeth!
    And yet what idle dream breaks ill,
      Which morning-light subdueth?
    And who would murmur and misdoubt,
    When God's great sunrise finds him out?




_THE SOUL'S TRAVELLING._

    ~Ede noerous
    Petasai tarsous.~

    SYNESIUS.


    I.

    I dwell amid the city ever.
    The great humanity which beats
    Its life along the stony streets,
    Like a strong and unsunned river
    In a self-made course,
    I sit and hearken while it rolls.
    Very sad and very hoarse
    Certes is the flow of souls;
    Infinitest tendencies
    By the finite prest and pent,
    In the finite, turbulent:
    How we tremble in surprise
    When sometimes, with an awful sound,
    God's great plummet strikes the ground!

    II.

    The champ of the steeds on the silver bit,
    As they whirl the rich man's carriage by;
    The beggar's whine as he looks at it,--
    But it goes too fast for charity;
    The trail on the street of the poor man's broom,
    That the lady who walks to her palace-home,
    On her silken skirt may catch no dust;
    The tread of the business-men who must
    Count their per-cents by the paces they take;
    The cry of the babe unheard of its mother
    Though it lie on her breast, while she thinks of the other
    Laid yesterday where it will not wake;
    The flower-girl's prayer to buy roses and pinks
    Held out in the smoke, like stars by day;
    The gin-door's oath that hollowly chinks
    Guilt upon grief and wrong upon hate;
    The cabman's cry to get out of the way;
    The dustman's call down the area-grate;
    The young maid's jest, and the old wife's scold,
    The haggling talk of the boys at a stall,
    The fight in the street which is backed for gold,
    The plea of the lawyers in Westminster Hall;
    The drop on the stones of the blind man's staff
    As he trades in his own grief's sacredness,
    The brothel shriek, and the Newgate laugh,
    The hum upon 'Change, and the organ's grinding,
    (The grinder's face being nevertheless
    Dry and vacant of even woe
    While the children's hearts are leaping so
    At the merry music's winding;)
    The black-plumed funeral's creeping train,
    Long and slow (and yet they will go
    As fast as Life though it hurry and strain!)
    Creeping the populous houses through
    And nodding their plumes at either side,--
    At many a house, where an infant, new
    To the sunshiny world, has just struggled and cried,--
    At many a house where sitteth a bride
    Trying to-morrow's coronals
    With a scarlet blush to-day:
      Slowly creep the funerals,
    As none should hear the noise and say
    "The living, the living must go away
        To multiply the dead."
      Hark! an upward shout is sent,
    In grave strong joy from tower to steeple
        The bells ring out,
    The trumpets sound, the people shout,
    The young queen goes to her Parliament.
    She turneth round her large blue eyes
    More bright with childish memories
    Than royal hopes, upon the people;
    On either side she bows her head
      Lowly, with a queenly grace
    And smile most trusting-innocent,
    As if she smiled upon her mother;
    The thousands press before each other
        To bless her to her face;
    And booms the deep majestic voice
    Through trump and drum,--"May the queen rejoice
        In the people's liberties!"

    III.

        I dwell amid the city,
        And hear the flow of souls in act and speech,
    For pomp or trade, for merrymake or folly:
    I hear the confluence and sum of each,
        And that is melancholy!
    Thy voice is a complaint, O crowned city,
    The blue sky covering thee like God's great pity.

    IV.

    O blue sky! it mindeth me
    Of places where I used to see
    Its vast unbroken circle thrown
    From the far pale-peaked hill
    Out to the last verge of ocean,
    As by God's arm it were done
    Then for the first time, with the emotion
    Of that first impulse on it still.
    Oh, we spirits fly at will
    Faster than the winged steed
    Whereof in old book we read,
    With the sunlight foaming back
    From his flanks to a misty wrack,
    And his nostril reddening proud
    As he breasteth the steep thundercloud,--
    Smoother than Sabrina's chair
    Gliding up from wave to air,
    While she smileth debonair
    Yet holy, coldly and yet brightly,
    Like her own mooned waters nightly,
      Through her dripping hair.

    V.

    Very fast and smooth we fly,
    Spirits, though the flesh be by;
    All looks feed not from the eye
    Nor all hearings from the ear:
    We can hearken and espy
    Without either, we can journey
    Bold and gay as knight to tourney,
    And, though we wear no visor down
    To dark our countenance, the foe
    Shall never chafe us as we go.

    VI.

    I am gone from peopled town!
    It passeth its street-thunder round
    My body which yet hears no sound,
    For now another sound, another
    Vision, my soul's senses have--
    O'er a hundred valleys deep
    Where the hills' green shadows sleep
    Scarce known because the valley-trees
    Cross those upland images,
    O'er a hundred hills each other
    Watching to the western wave,
    I have travelled,--I have found
    The silent, lone, remembered ground.

    VII.

    I have found a grassy niche
    Hollowed in a seaside hill,
    As if the ocean-grandeur which
    Is aspectable from the place,
    Had struck the hill as with a mace
    Sudden and cleaving. You might fill
    That little nook with the little cloud
    Which sometimes lieth by the moon
    To beautify a night of June;
    A cavelike nook which, opening all
    To the wide sea, is disallowed
    From its own earth's sweet pastoral:
    Cavelike, but roofless overhead
    And made of verdant banks instead
    Of any rocks, with flowerets spread
    Instead of spar and stalactite,
    Cowslips and daisies gold and white:
    Such pretty flowers on such green sward,
    You think the sea they look toward
    Doth serve them for another sky
    As warm and blue as that on high.

    VIII.

    And in this hollow is a seat,
    And when you shall have crept to it,
    Slipping down the banks too steep
    To be o'erbrowzed by the sheep,
    Do not think--though at your feet
    The cliffs disrupt--you shall behold
    The line where earth and ocean meet;
    You sit too much above to view
    The solemn confluence of the two:
    You can hear them as they greet,
    You can hear that evermore
    Distance-softened noise more old
    Than Nereid's singing, the tide spent
    Joining soft issues with the shore
    In harmony of discontent,
    And when you hearken to the grave
    Lamenting of the underwave,
    You must believe in earth's communion
    Albeit you witness not the union.

    IX.

    Except that sound, the place is full
    Of silences, which when you cull
    By any word, it thrills you so
    That presently you let them grow
    To meditation's fullest length
    Across your soul with a soul's strength:
    And as they touch your soul, they borrow
    Both of its grandeur and its sorrow,
    That deathly odour which the clay
    Leaves on its deathlessness alway.

    X.

    Alway! alway? must this be?
    Rapid Soul from city gone,
    Dost thou carry inwardly
    What doth make the city's moan?
    Must this deep sigh of thine own
    Haunt thee with humanity?
    Green visioned banks that are too steep
    To be o'erbrowzed by the sheep,
    May all sad thoughts adown you creep
    Without a shepherd? Mighty sea,
    Can we dwarf thy magnitude
    And fit it to our straitest mood?
    O fair, fair Nature, are we thus
    Impotent and querulous
    Among thy workings glorious,
    Wealth and sanctities, that still
    Leave us vacant and defiled
    And wailing like a soft-kissed child,
    Kissed soft against his will?

    XI.

                God, God!
            With a child's voice I cry,
            Weak, sad, confidingly--
                God, God!
    Thou knowest, eyelids, raised not always up
    Unto Thy love, (as none of ours are) droop
        As ours, o'er many a tear;
    Thou knowest, though Thy universe is broad,
    Two little tears suffice to cover all:
    Thou knowest, Thou who art so prodigal
    Of beauty, we are oft but stricken deer
    Expiring in the woods, that care for none
    Of those delightsome flowers they die upon.

    XII.

    O blissful Mouth which breathed the mournful breath
    We name our souls, self-spoilt!--by that strong passion
    Which paled Thee once with sighs, by that strong death
    Which made Thee once unbreathing--from the wrack
    Themselves have called around them, call them back,
    Back to Thee in continuous aspiration!
        For here, O Lord,
    For here they travel vainly, vainly pass
    From city-pavement to untrodden sward
    Where the lark finds her deep nest in the grass
    Cold with the earth's last dew. Yea, very vain
    The greatest speed of all these souls of men
    Unless they travel upward to the throne
    Where sittest THOU the satisfying ONE,
    With help for sins and holy perfectings
    For all requirements: while the archangel, raising
    Unto Thy face his full ecstatic gazing,
    Forgets the rush and rapture of his wings.




_TO BETTINE,_

THE CHILD-FRIEND OF GOETHE.

"I have the second sight, Goethe!"--_Letters of a Child._


    I.

      Bettine, friend of Goethe,
    _Hadst_ thou the second sight--
    Upturning worship and delight
      With such a loving duty
    To his grand face, as women will,
    The childhood 'neath thine eyelids still?

    II.

      --Before his shrine to doom thee,
    Using the same child's smile
    That heaven and earth, beheld erewhile
      For the first time, won from thee
    Ere star and flower grew dim and dead
    Save at his feet and o'er his head?

    III.

      --Digging thine heart and throwing
    Away its childhood's gold,
    That so its woman-depth might hold
      His spirit's overflowing?
    (For surging souls, no worlds can bound,
    Their channel in the heart have found.)

    IV.

      O child, to change appointed,
    Thou hadst not second sight!
    What eyes the future view aright
      Unless by tears anointed?
    Yea, only tears themselves can show
    The burning ones that have to flow.

    V.

      O woman, deeply loving,
    Thou hadst not second sight!
    The star is very high and bright,
      And none can see it moving.
    Love looks around, below, above,
    Yet all his prophecy is--love.

    VI.

      The bird thy childhood's playing
    Sent onward o'er the sea,
    Thy dove of hope came back to thee
      Without a leaf: art laying
    Its wet cold wing no sun can dry,
    Still in thy bosom secretly?

    VII.

      Our Goethe's friend, Bettine,
    I have the second sight!
    The stone upon his grave is white,
      The funeral stone between ye;
    And in thy mirror thou hast viewed
    Some change as hardly understood.

    VIII.

      Where's childhood? where is Goethe?
    The tears are in thine eyes.
    Nay, thou shalt yet reorganize
      Thy maidenhood of beauty
    In his own glory, which is smooth
    Of wrinkles and sublime in youth.

    IX.

      The poet's arms have wound thee,
    He breathes upon thy brow,
    He lifts thee upward in the glow
      Of his great genius round thee,--
    The childlike poet undefiled
    Preserving evermore THE CHILD.




_MAN AND NATURE._


    A sad man on a summer day
    Did look upon the earth and say--

    "Purple cloud the hill-top binding;
    Folded hills the valleys wind in;
    Valleys with fresh streams among you;
    Streams with bosky trees along you;
    Trees with many birds and blossoms;
    Birds with music-trembling bosoms;
    Blossoms dropping dews that wreathe you
    To your fellow flowers beneath you;
    Flowers that constellate on earth;
    Earth that shakest to the mirth
    Of the merry Titan Ocean,
    All his shining hair in motion!
    Why am I thus the only one
    Who can be dark beneath the sun?"

    But when the summer day was past,
    He looked to heaven and smiled at last,
    Self-answered so--
                      "Because, O cloud,
    Pressing with thy crumpled shroud
    Heavily on mountain top,--
    Hills that almost seem to drop
    Stricken with a misty death
    To the valleys underneath,--
    Valleys sighing with the torrent,--
    Waters streaked with branches horrent,--
    Branchless trees that shake your head
    Wildly o'er your blossoms spread
    Where the common flowers are found,--
    Flowers with foreheads to the ground,--
    Ground that shriekest while the sea
    With his iron smiteth thee--
    I am, besides, the only one
    Who can be bright _without_ the sun."




_A SEA-SIDE WALK._


    I.

          We walked beside the sea
    After a day which perished silently
    Of its own glory--like the princess weird
    Who, combating the Genius, scorched and seared,
    Uttered with burning breath, "Ho! victory!"
    And sank adown, a heap of ashes pale:
          So runs the Arab tale.

    II.

          The sky above us showed
    A universal and unmoving cloud
    On which the cliffs permitted us to see
    Only the outline of their majesty,
    As master-minds when gazed at by the crowd:
    And shining with a gloom, the water grey
          Swang in its moon-taught way.

    III.

          Nor moon, nor stars were out;
    They did not dare to tread so soon about,
    Though trembling, in the footsteps of the sun:
    The light was neither night's nor day's, but one
    Which, life-like, had a beauty in its doubt,
    And silence's impassioned breathings round
          Seemed wandering into sound.

    IV.

          O solemn-beating heart
    Of nature! I have knowledge that thou art
    Bound unto man's by cords he cannot sever;
    And, what time they are slackened by him ever,
    So to attest his own supernal part,
    Still runneth thy vibration fast and strong
          The slackened cord along:

    V.

          For though we never spoke
    Of the grey water and the shaded rock,
    Dark wave and stone unconsciously were fused
    Into the plaintive speaking that we used
    Of absent friends and memories unforsook;
    And, had we seen each other's face, we had
          Seen haply each was sad.




_THE SEA-MEW._

AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED TO M. E. H.


    I.

    How joyously the young sea-mew
    Lay dreaming on the waters blue
    Whereon our little bark had thrown
    A little shade, the only one,
    But shadows ever man pursue.

    II.

    Familiar with the waves and free
    As if their own white foam were he,
    His heart upon the heart of ocean
    Lay learning all its mystic motion,
    And throbbing to the throbbing sea.

    III.

    And such a brightness in his eye
    As if the ocean and the sky
    Within him had lit up and nurst
    A soul God gave him not at first,
    To comprehend their majesty.

    IV.

    We were not cruel, yet did sunder
    His white wing from the blue waves under,
    And bound it, while his fearless eyes
    Shone up to ours in calm surprise,
    As deeming us some ocean wonder.

    V.

    We bore our ocean bird unto
    A grassy place where he might view
    The flowers that curtsey to the bees,
    The waving of the tall green trees,
    The falling of the silver dew.

    VI.

    But flowers of earth were pale to him
    Who had seen the rainbow fishes swim;
    And when earth's dew around him lay
    He thought of ocean's winged spray,
    And his eye waxed sad and dim.

    VII.

    The green trees round him only made
    A prison with their darksome shade;
    And drooped his wing, and mourned he
    For his own boundless glittering sea--
    Albeit he knew not they could fade.

    VIII.

    Then One her gladsome face did bring,
    Her gentle voice's murmuring,
    In ocean's stead his heart to move
    And teach him what was human love:
    He thought it a strange, mournful thing.

    IX.

    He lay down in his grief to die,
    (First looking to the sea-like sky
    That hath no waves) because, alas!
    Our human touch did on him pass,
    And, with our touch, our agony.




_FELICIA HEMANS_

TO L. E. L.,

REFERRING TO HER MONODY ON THE POETESS.


    I.

    Thou bay-crowned living One that o'er the bay-crowned Dead art bowing,
    And o'er the shadeless moveless brow the vital shadow throwing,
    And o'er the sighless songless lips the wail and music wedding,
    And dropping o'er the tranquil eyes the tears not of their shedding!--

    II.

    Take music from the silent Dead whose meaning is completer,
    Reserve thy tears for living brows where all such tears are meeter,
    And leave the violets in the grass to brighten where thou treadest,
    No flowers for her! no need of flowers, albeit "bring flowers!" thou
        saidest.

    III.

    Yes, flowers, to crown the "cup and lute," since both may come to
        breaking,
    Or flowers, to greet the "bride"--the heart's own beating works its
        aching;
    Or flowers, to soothe the "captive's" sight, from earth's free bosom
        gathered,
    Reminding of his earthly hope, then withering as it withered:

    IV.

    But bring not near the solemn corse a type of human seeming,
    Lay only dust's stern verity upon the dust undreaming:
    And while the calm perpetual stars shall look upon it solely,
    Her sphered soul shall look on _them_ with eyes more bright and holy.

    V.

    Nor mourn, O living One, because her part in life was mourning:
    Would she have lost the poet's fire for anguish of the burning?
    The minstrel harp, for the strained string? the tripod, for the
        afflated
    Woe? or the vision, for those tears in which it shone dilated?

    VI.

    Perhaps she shuddered while the world's cold hand her brow was
        wreathing,
    But never wronged that mystic breath which breathed in all her
        breathing,
    Which drew, from rocky earth and man, abstractions high and moving,
    Beauty, if not the beautiful, and love, if not the loving.

    VII.

    Such visionings have paled in sight; the Saviour she descrieth,
    And little recks _who_ wreathed the brow which on His bosom lieth:
    The whiteness of His innocence o'er all her garments, flowing,
    There learneth she the sweet "new song" she will not mourn in knowing.

    VIII.

    Be happy, crowned and living One! and as thy dust decayeth
    May thine own England say for thee what now for Her it sayeth--
    "Albeit softly in our ears her silver song was ringing,
    The foot-fall of her parting soul is softer than her singing."




_L. E. L.'S LAST QUESTION._

    "Do you think of me as I think of you?"
    (_From her poem written during the voyage to the Cape._)


    I.

    "Do you think of me as I think of you,
    My friends, my friends?"--She said it from the sea,
    The English minstrel in her minstrelsy,
    While, under brighter skies than erst she knew,
    Her heart grew dark, and groped there as the blind
    To reach across the waves friends left behind--
    "Do you think of me as I think of you?"

    II.

    It seemed not much to ask--"as _I_ of _you_?"
    We all do ask the same; no eyelids cover
    Within the meekest eyes that question over:
    And little in the world the Loving do
    But sit (among the rocks?) and listen for
    The echo of their own love evermore--
    "Do you think of me as I think of you?"

    III.

    Love-learned she had sung of love and love,--
    And like a child that, sleeping with dropt head
    Upon the fairy-book he lately read,
    Whatever household noises round him move,
    Hears in his dream some elfin turbulence,--
    Even so suggestive to her inward sense,
    All sounds of life assumed one tune of love.

    IV.

    And when the glory of her dream withdrew,
    When knightly gestes and courtly pageantries
    Were broken in her visionary eyes
    By tears the solemn seas attested true,--
    Forgetting that sweet lute beside her hand,
    She asked not,--"Do you praise me, O my land?"
    But,--"Think ye of me, friends, as I of you?"

    V.

    Hers was the hand that played for many a year
    Love's silver phrase for England, smooth and well.
    Would God her heart's more inward oracle
    In that lone moment might confirm her dear!
    For when her questioned friends in agony
    Made passionate response, "We think of thee,"
    Her place was in the dust, too deep to hear.

    VI.

    Could she not wait to catch their answering breath?
    Was she content, content with ocean's sound
    Which dashed its mocking infinite around
    One thirsty for a little love?--beneath
    Those stars content, where last her song had gone,--
    They mute and cold in radiant life, as soon
    Their singer was to be, in darksome death?[8]

    VII.

    Bring your vain answers--cry, "We think of thee!"
    How think ye of her? warm in long ago
    Delights? or crowned with budding bays? Not so.
    None smile and none are crowned where lieth she,
    With all her visions unfulfilled save one,
    Her childhood's, of the palm-trees in the sun--
    And lo! their shadow on her sepulchre!

    VIII.

    "Do ye think of me as I think of you?"--
    O friends, O kindred, O dear brotherhood
    Of all the world! what are we that we should
    For covenants of long affection sue?
    Why press so near each other when the touch
    Is barred by graves? Not much, and yet too much
    Is this "Think of me as I think of you."

    IX.

    But while on mortal lips I shape anew
    A sigh to mortal issues, verily
    Above the unshaken stars that see us die,
    A vocal pathos rolls; and HE who drew
    All life from dust, and for all tasted death,
    By death and life and love appealing, saith
    _Do you think of me as I think of you?_

FOOTNOTES:

[8] Her lyric on the Polar Star came home with her latest papers.




END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.


                               PRINTED BY
                SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
                                 LONDON

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes: Archaic and variable spelling and hyphenation are
preserved. Passages in italics indicated by _underscores_. Greek
transliterations indicated by ~tildes~. A very few minor printer's
errors have been corrected. In "The Romaunt of the Page," single quotation
and double quotation marks have been preserved as printed, in spite of
their confusing usage; no clearer edition could be found.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of Elizabeth
Barrett Browning, by Elizabeth Barrett Browning

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POETICAL WORKS OF E. B. BARRETT ***

***** This file should be named 33363-8.txt or 33363-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/3/6/33363/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Chandra Friend and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
?The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of Elizabeth Barrett
Browning, Volume IV, by Elizabeth Barrett Browning

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Poetical Works of Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Volume IV

Author: Elizabeth Barrett Browning

Release Date: January 18, 2010 [EBook #31015]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORKS OF E.B. BROWNING, VOL IV ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Henry Craig, Katherine Ward
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





  The Poetical Works
  of
  Elizabeth Barrett Browning

  _In Six Volumes_

  Vol. IV.


  London
  Smith, Elder, & Co., 15 Waterloo Place
  1890




CONTENTS.

  POEMS:--
     A Child's Grave at Florence                                     3
     Catarina to Camoens                                            12
     Life and Love                                                  20
     A Denial                                                       22
     Proof and Disproof                                             25
     Question and Answer                                            29
     Inclusions                                                     30
     Insufficiency                                                  32

  SONNETS FROM THE PORTUGUESE                                       33

  CASA GUIDI WINDOWS:--
     First Part                                                     83
     Second Part                                                   134

  POEMS BEFORE CONGRESS:--
     Napoleon III. in Italy                                        171
     The Dance                                                     190
     A Tale of Villafranca                                         195
     A Court Lady                                                  200
     An August Voice                                               207
     Christmas Gifts                                               213
     Italy and the World                                           217
     A Curse for a Nation                                          227

  LAST POEMS:--
     Little Mattie                                                 241
     A False Step                                                  246
     Void in Law                                                   248
     Lord Walter's Wife                                            252
     Bianca among the Nightingales                                 259
     My Kate                                                       267
     A Song for the Ragged Schools of London                       270
     May's Love                                                    279
     Amy's Cruelty                                                 280
     My Heart and I                                                284
     The Best Thing in the World                                   287
     Where's Agnes?                                                288




POEMS


A CHILD'S GRAVE AT FLORENCE.

A.A.E.C.

Born, July 1848. Died, November 1849


  I.

  Of English blood, of Tuscan birth,
    What country should we give her?
  Instead of any on the earth,
    The civic Heavens receive her.

  II.

  And here among the English tombs
    In Tuscan ground we lay her,
  While the blue Tuscan sky endomes
    Our English words of prayer.

  III.

  A little child!--how long she lived,
    By months, not years, is reckoned:
  Born in one July, she survived
    Alone to see a second.

  IV.

  Bright-featured, as the July sun
    Her little face still played in,
  And splendours, with her birth begun,
    Had had no time for fading.

  V.

  So, LILY, from those July hours,
    No wonder we should call her;
  She looked such kinship to the flowers,--
    Was but a little taller.

  VI.

  A Tuscan Lily,--only white,
    As Dante, in abhorrence
  Of red corruption, wished aright
    The lilies of his Florence.

  VII.

  We could not wish her whiter,--her
    Who perfumed with pure blossom
  The house--a lovely thing to wear
    Upon a mother's bosom!

  VIII.

  This July creature thought perhaps
    Our speech not worth assuming;
  She sat upon her parents' laps
    And mimicked the gnat's humming;

  IX.

  Said "father," "mother"--then left off,
    For tongues celestial, fitter:
  Her hair had grown just long enough
    To catch heaven's jasper-glitter.

  X.

  Babes! Love could always hear and see
    Behind the cloud that hid them.
  "Let little children come to Me,
    And do not thou forbid them."

  XI.

  So, unforbidding, have we met,
    And gently here have laid her,
  Though winter is no time to get
    The flowers that should o'erspread her:

  XII.

  We should bring pansies quick with spring,
    Rose, violet, daffodilly,
  And also, above everything,
    White lilies for our Lily.

  XIII.

  Nay, more than flowers, this grave exacts,--
    Glad, grateful attestations
  Of her sweet eyes and pretty acts,
    With calm renunciations.

  XIV.

  Her very mother with light feet
    Should leave the place too earthy,
  Saying "The angels have thee, Sweet,
    Because we are not worthy."

  XV.

  But winter kills the orange-buds,
    The gardens in the frost are,
  And all the heart dissolves in floods,
    Remembering we have lost her.

  XVI.

  Poor earth, poor heart,--too weak, too weak
    To miss the July shining!
  Poor heart!--what bitter words we speak
    When God speaks of resigning!

  XVII.

  Sustain this heart in us that faints,
    Thou God, the self-existent!
  We catch up wild at parting saints
    And feel Thy heaven too distant.

  XVIII.

  The wind that swept them out of sin
    Has ruffled all our vesture:
  On the shut door that let them in
    We beat with frantic gesture,--

  XIX.

  To us, us also, open straight!
    The outer life is chilly;
  Are _we_ too, like the earth, to wait
    Till next year for our Lily?

  XX.

  --Oh, my own baby on my knees,
    My leaping, dimpled treasure,
  At every word I write like these,
    Clasped close with stronger pressure!

  XXI.

  Too well my own heart understands,--
    At every word beats fuller--
  My little feet, my little hands,
    And hair of Lily's colour!

  XXII.

  But God gives patience, Love learns strength,
    And Faith remembers promise,
  And Hope itself can smile at length
    On other hopes gone from us.

  XXIII.

  Love, strong as Death, shall conquer Death,
    Through struggle made more glorious:
  This mother stills her sobbing breath,
    Renouncing yet victorious.

  XXIV.

  Arms, empty of her child, she lifts
    With spirit unbereaven,--
  "God will not all take back His gifts;
    My Lily's mine in heaven.

  XXV.

  "Still mine! maternal rights serene
    Not given to another!
  The crystal bars shine faint between
    The souls of child and mother.

  XXVI.

  "Meanwhile," the mother cries, "content!
    Our love was well divided:
  Its sweetness following where she went,
    Its anguish stayed where I did.

  XXVII.

  "Well done of God, to halve the lot,
    And give her all the sweetness;
  To us, the empty room and cot,--
    To her, the Heaven's completeness.

  XXVIII.

  "To us, this grave,--to her, the rows
    The mystic palm-trees spring in;
  To us, the silence in the house,--
    To her, the choral singing.

  XXIX.

  "For her, to gladden in God's view,--
    For us, to hope and bear on.
  Grow, Lily, in thy garden new,
    Beside the Rose of Sharon!

  XXX.

  "Grow fast in heaven, sweet Lily clipped,
    In love more calm than this is,
  And may the angels dewy-lipped
    Remind thee of our kisses!

  XXXI.

  "While none shall tell thee of our tears,
    These human tears now falling,
  Till, after a few patient years,
    One home shall take us all in.

  XXXII.

  "Child, father, mother--who, left out?
    Not mother, and not father!
  And when, our dying couch about,
    The natural mists shall gather,

  XXXIII.

  "Some smiling angel close shall stand
    In old Correggio's fashion,
  And bear a LILY in his hand,
    For death's ANNUNCIATION."




CATARINA TO CAMOENS

(DYING IN HIS ABSENCE ABROAD, AND REFERRING TO THE POEM IN WHICH HE
RECORDED THE SWEETNESS OF HER EYES).


  I.

  On the door you will not enter,
    I have gazed too long: adieu!
  Hope withdraws her peradventure;
    Death is near me,--and not _you_.
        Come, O lover,
        Close and cover
  These poor eyes, you called, I ween,
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen!"

  II.

  When I heard you sing that burden
    In my vernal days and bowers,
  Other praises disregarding,
    I but hearkened that of yours--
        Only saying
        In heart-playing,
  "Blessed eyes mine eyes have been,
  If the sweetest HIS have seen!"

  III.

  But all changes. At this vesper,
    Cold the sun shines down the door.
  If you stood there, would you whisper
    "Love, I love you," as before,--
        Death pervading
        Now, and shading
  Eyes you sang of, that yestreen,
  As the sweetest ever seen?

  IV.

  Yes. I think, were you beside them,
    Near the bed I die upon,
  Though their beauty you denied them,
    As you stood there, looking down,
        You would truly
        Call them duly,
  For the love's sake found therein,
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen."

  V.

  And if _you_ looked down upon them,
    And if _they_ looked up to _you_,
  All the light which has foregone them
    Would be gathered back anew:
        They would truly
        Be as duly
  Love-transformed to beauty's sheen,
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen."

  VI.

  But, ah me! you only see me,
    In your thoughts of loving man,
  Smiling soft perhaps and dreamy
    Through the wavings of my fan;
        And unweeting
        Go repeating,
  In your reverie serene,
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen----"

  VII.

  While my spirit leans and reaches
    From my body still and pale,
  Fain to hear what tender speech is
    In your love to help my bale.
        O my poet,
        Come and show it!
  Come, of latest love, to glean
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen."

  VIII.

  O my poet, O my prophet,
    When you praised their sweetness so,
  Did you think, in singing of it,
    That it might be near to go?
        Had you fancies
        From their glances,
  That the grave would quickly screen
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen"?

  IX.

  No reply. The fountain's warble
    In the courtyard sounds alone.
  As the water to the marble
    So my heart falls with a moan
        From love-sighing
        To this dying.
  Death forerunneth Love to win
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen."

  X.

  _Will_ you come? When I'm departed
    Where all sweetnesses are hid,
  Where thy voice, my tender-hearted,
    Will not lift up either lid.
        Cry, O lover,
        Love is over!
  Cry, beneath the cypress green,
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen!"

  XI.

  When the angelus is ringing,
    Near the convent will you walk,
  And recall the choral singing
    Which brought angels down our talk?
        Spirit-shriven
        I viewed Heaven,
  Till you smiled--"Is earth unclean,
  Sweetest eyes were ever seen?"

  XII.

  When beneath the palace-lattice
    You ride slow as you have done,
  And you see a face there that is
    Not the old familiar one,--
        Will you oftly
        Murmur softly,
  "Here ye watched me morn and e'en,
  Sweetest eyes were ever seen!"

  XIII.

  When the palace-ladies, sitting
    Round your gittern, shall have said,
  "Poet, sing those verses written
    For the lady who is dead,"
        Will you tremble
        Yet dissemble,--
  Or sing hoarse, with tears between,
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen"?

  XIV.

  "Sweetest eyes!" how sweet in flowings
    The repeated cadence is!
  Though you sang a hundred poems,
    Still the best one would be this.
        I can hear it
        'Twixt my spirit
  And the earth-noise intervene--
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen!"

  XV.

  But the priest waits for the praying,
    And the choir are on their knees,
  And the soul must pass away in
    Strains more solemn-high than these.
        _Miserere_
        For the weary!
  Oh, no longer for Catrine
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen!"

  XVI.

  Keep my riband, take and keep it,
    (I have loosed it from my hair)[1]
  Feeling, while you overweep it,
    Not alone in your despair,
        Since with saintly
        Watch unfaintly
  Out of heaven shall o'er you lean
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen."

  XVII.

  But--but _now_--yet unremoved
    Up to heaven, they glisten fast;
  You may cast away, Beloved,
    In your future all my past:
        Such old phrases
        May be praises
  For some fairer bosom-queen--
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen!"

  XVIII.

  Eyes of mine, what are ye doing?
    Faithless, faithless,--praised amiss
  If a tear be of your showing,
    Dropt for any hope of HIS!
        Death has boldness
        Besides coldness,
  If unworthy tears demean
  "Sweetest eyes were ever seen."

  XIX.

  I will look out to his future;
    I will bless it till it shine.
  Should he ever be a suitor
    Unto sweeter eyes than mine,
        Sunshine gild them,
        Angels shield them,
  Whatsoever eyes terrene
  _Be_ the sweetest HIS have seen!


FOOTNOTES:

   [1] She left him the riband from her hair.




LIFE AND LOVE.


  I.

  Fast this Life of mine was dying,
    Blind already and calm as death,
  Snowflakes on her bosom lying
    Scarcely heaving with her breath.

  II.

  Love came by, and having known her
    In a dream of fabled lands,
  Gently stooped, and laid upon her
    Mystic chrism of holy hands;

  III.

  Drew his smile across her folded
    Eyelids, as the swallow dips;
  Breathed as finely as the cold did
    Through the locking of her lips.

  IV.

  So, when Life looked upward, being
    Warmed and breathed on from above,
  What sight could she have for seeing,
    Evermore ... but only LOVE?




A DENIAL.


  I.

  We have met late--it is too late to meet,
      O friend, not more than friend!
  Death's forecome shroud is tangled round my feet,
  And if I step or stir, I touch the end.
      In this last jeopardy
  Can I approach thee, I, who cannot move?
  How shall I answer thy request for love?
      Look in my face and see.

  II.

  I love thee not, I dare not love thee! go
      In silence; drop my hand.
  If thou seek roses, seek them where they blow
  In garden-alleys, not in desert-sand.
      Can life and death agree,
  That thou shouldst stoop thy song to my complaint?
  I cannot love thee. If the word is faint,
      Look in my face and see.

  III.

  I might have loved thee in some former days.
      Oh, then, my spirits had leapt
  As now they sink, at hearing thy love-praise!
  Before these faded cheeks were overwept,
      Had this been asked of me,
  To love thee with my whole strong heart and head,--
  I should have said still ... yes, but _smiled_ and said,
      "Look in my face and see!"

  IV.

  But now ... God sees me, God, who took my heart
      And drowned it in life's surge.
  In all your wide warm earth I have no part--
  A light song overcomes me like a dirge.
      Could Love's great harmony
  The saints keep step to when their bonds are loose,
  Not weigh me down? am _I_ a wife to choose?
      Look in my face and see--

  V.

  While I behold, as plain as one who dreams,
      Some woman of full worth,
  Whose voice, as cadenced as a silver stream's,
  Shall prove the fountain-soul which sends it forth;
      One younger, more thought-free
  And fair and gay, than I, thou must forget,
  With brighter eyes than these ... which are not wet ...
      Look in my face and see!

  VI.

  So farewell thou, whom I have known too late
      To let thee come so near.
  Be counted happy while men call thee great,
  And one beloved woman feels thee dear!--
      Not I!--that cannot be.
  I am lost, I am changed,--I must go farther, where
  The change shall take me worse, and no one dare
      Look in my face and see.

  VII.

  Meantime I bless thee. By these thoughts of mine
      I bless thee from all such!
  I bless thy lamp to oil, thy cup to wine,
  Thy hearth to joy, thy hand to an equal touch
      Of loyal troth. For me,
  I love thee not, I love thee not!--away!
  Here's no more courage in my soul to say
      "Look in my face and see."




PROOF AND DISPROOF.


  I.

  Dost thou love me, my Beloved?
    Who shall answer yes or no?
  What is proved or disproved
    When my soul inquireth so,
  Dost thou love me, my Beloved?

  II.

  I have seen thy heart to-day,
    Never open to the crowd,
  While to love me aye and aye
    Was the vow as it was vowed
  By thine eyes of steadfast grey.

  III.

  Now I sit alone, alone--
    And the hot tears break and burn,
  Now, Beloved, thou art gone,
    Doubt and terror have their turn.
  _Is_ it love that I have known?

  IV.

  I have known some bitter things,--
    Anguish, anger, solitude.
  Year by year an evil brings,
    Year by year denies a good;
  March winds violate my springs.

  V.

  I have known how sickness bends,
    I have known how sorrow breaks,--
  How quick hopes have sudden ends,
    How the heart thinks till it aches
  Of the smile of buried friends.

  VI.

  Last, I have known _thee_, my brave
    Noble thinker, lover, doer!
  The best knowledge last I have.
    But thou comest as the thrower
  Of fresh flowers upon a grave.

  VII.

  Count what feelings used to move me!
    Can this love assort with those?
  Thou, who art so far above me,
    Wilt thou stoop so, for repose?
  Is it true that thou canst love me?

  VIII.

  Do not blame me if I doubt thee.
    I can call love by its name
  When thine arm is wrapt about me;
    But even love seems not the same,
  When I sit alone, without thee.

  IX.

  In thy clear eyes I descried
    Many a proof of love, to-day;
  But to-night, those unbelied
    Speechful eyes being gone away,
  There's the proof to seek, beside.

  X.

  Dost thou love me, my Beloved?
    Only _thou_ canst answer yes!
  And, thou gone, the proof's disproved,
    And the cry rings answerless--
  Dost thou love me, my Beloved?




QUESTION AND ANSWER.


  I.

  Love you seek for, presupposes
    Summer heat and sunny glow.
  Tell me, do you find moss-roses
    Budding, blooming in the snow?
  Snow might kill the rose-tree's root--
  Shake it quickly from your foot,
    Lest it harm you as you go.

  II.

  From the ivy where it dapples
    A grey ruin, stone by stone,
  Do you look for grapes or apples,
    Or for sad green leaves alone?
  Pluck the leaves off, two or three--
  Keep them for morality
    When you shall be safe and gone.




INCLUSIONS.


  I.

  Oh, wilt thou have my hand, Dear, to lie along in thine?
  As a little stone in a running stream, it seems to lie and pine.
  Now drop the poor pale hand, Dear, unfit to plight with thine.

  II.

  Oh, wilt thou have my cheek, Dear, drawn closer to thine own?
  My cheek is white, my cheek is worn, by many a tear run down.
  Now leave a little space, Dear, lest it should wet thine own.

  III.

  Oh, must thou have my soul, Dear, commingled with thy soul?--
  Red grows the cheek, and warm the hand; the part is in the whole:
  Nor hands nor cheeks keep separate, when soul is joined to soul.




INSUFFICIENCY.


  I.

  There is no one beside thee and no one above thee,
    Thou standest alone as the nightingale sings!
    And my words that would praise thee are impotent things,
  For none can express thee though all should approve thee.
    I love thee so, Dear, that I only can love thee.

  II.

  Say, what can I do for thee? weary thee, grieve thee?
    Lean on thy shoulder, new burdens to add?
    Weep my tears over thee, making thee sad?
  Oh, hold me not--love me not! let me retrieve thee.
    I love thee so, Dear, that I only can leave thee.




SONNETS FROM THE PORTUGUESE


I.

  I thought once how Theocritus had sung
  Of the sweet years, the dear and wished-for years,
  Who each one in a gracious hand appears
  To bear a gift for mortals, old or young:
  And, as I mused it in his antique tongue,
  I saw, in gradual vision through my tears,
  The sweet, sad years, the melancholy years,
  Those of my own life, who by turns had flung
  A shadow across me. Straightway I was 'ware,
  So weeping, how a mystic Shape did move
  Behind me, and drew me backward by the hair;
  And a voice said in mastery, while I strove,--
  "Guess now who holds thee?"--"Death," I said. But, there,
  The silver answer rang,--"Not Death, but Love."


II.

  But only three in all God's universe
  Have heard this word thou hast said,--Himself, beside
  Thee speaking, and me listening! and replied
  One of us ... _that_ was God, ... and laid the curse
  So darkly on my eyelids, as to amerce
  My sight from seeing thee,--that if I had died,
  The deathweights, placed there, would have signified
  Less absolute exclusion. "Nay" is worse
  From God than from all others, O my friend!
  Men could not part us with their worldly jars,
  Nor the seas change us, nor the tempests bend;
  Our hands would touch for all the mountain-bars:
  And, heaven being rolled between us at the end,
  We should but vow the faster for the stars.


III.

  Unlike are we, unlike, O princely Heart!
  Unlike our uses and our destinies.
  Our ministering two angels look surprise
  On one another, as they strike athwart
  Their wings in passing. Thou, bethink thee, art
  A guest for queens to social pageantries,
  With gages from a hundred brighter eyes
  Than tears even can make mine, to play thy part
  Of chief musician. What hast _thou_ to do
  With looking from the lattice-lights at me,
  A poor, tired, wandering singer, singing through
  The dark, and leaning up a cypress tree?
  The chrism is on thine head,--on mine, the dew,--
  And Death must dig the level where these agree.


IV.

  Thou hast thy calling to some palace-floor,
  Most gracious singer of high poems! where
  The dancers will break footing, from the care
  Of watching up thy pregnant lips for more.
  And dost thou lift this house's latch too poor
  For hand of thine? and canst thou think and bear
  To let thy music drop here unaware
  In folds of golden fulness at my door?
  Look up and see the casement broken in,
  The bats and owlets builders in the roof!
  My cricket chirps against thy mandolin.
  Hush, call no echo up in further proof
  Of desolation! there's a voice within
  That weeps ... as thou must sing ... alone, aloof.


V.

  I lift my heavy heart up solemnly,
  As once Electra her sepulchral urn,
  And, looking in thine eyes, I overturn
  The ashes at thy feet. Behold and see
  What a great heap of grief lay hid in me,
  And how the red wild sparkles dimly burn
  Through the ashen greyness. If thy foot in scorn
  Could tread them out to darkness utterly,
  It might be well perhaps. But if instead
  Thou wait beside me for the wind to blow
  The grey dust up, ... those laurels on thine head,
  O my Beloved, will not shield thee so,
  That none of all the fires shall scorch and shred
  The hair beneath. Stand further off then! go.


VI.

  Go from me. Yet I feel that I shall stand
  Henceforward in thy shadow. Nevermore
  Alone upon the threshold of my door
  Of individual life, I shall command
  The uses of my soul, nor lift my hand
  Serenely in the sunshine as before,
  Without the sense of that which I forbore--
  Thy touch upon the palm. The widest land
  Doom takes to part us, leaves thy heart in mine
  With pulses that beat double. What I do
  And what I dream include thee, as the wine
  Must taste of its own grapes. And when I sue
  God for myself, He hears that name of thine,
  And sees within my eyes the tears of two.


VII.

  The face of all the world is changed, I think,
  Since first I heard the footsteps of thy soul
  Move still, oh, still, beside me, as they stole
  Betwixt me and the dreadful outer brink
  Of obvious death, where I, who thought to sink,
  Was caught up into love, and taught the whole
  Of life in a new rhythm. The cup of dole
  God gave for baptism, I am fain to drink,
  And praise its sweetness, Sweet, with thee anear.
  The names of country, heaven, are changed away
  For where thou art or shalt be, there or here;
  And this ... this lute and song ... loved yesterday,
  (The singing angels know) are only dear
  Because thy name moves right in what they say.


VIII.

  What can I give thee back, O liberal
  And princely giver, who hast brought the gold
  And purple of thine heart, unstained, untold,
  And laid them on the outside of the wall
  For such as I to take or leave withal,
  In unexpected largesse? am I cold,
  Ungrateful, that for these most manifold
  High gifts, I render nothing back at all?
  Not so; not cold,--but very poor instead
  Ask God who knows. For frequent tears have run
  The colours from my life, and left so dead
  And pale a stuff, it were not fitly done
  To give the same as pillow to thy head.
  Go farther! let it serve to trample on.


IX.

  Can it be right to give what I can give?
  To let thee sit beneath the fall of tears
  As salt as mine, and hear the sighing years
  Re-sighing on my lips renunciative
  Through those infrequent smiles which fail to live
  For all thy adjurations? O my fears,
  That this can scarce be right! We are not peers,
  So to be lovers; and I own, and grieve,
  That givers of such gifts as mine are, must
  Be counted with the ungenerous. Out, alas!
  I will not soil thy purple with my dust,
  Nor breathe my poison on thy Venice-glass,
  Nor give thee any love--which were unjust.
  Beloved, I only love thee! let it pass.


X.

  Yet, love, mere love, is beautiful indeed
  And worthy of acceptation. Fire is bright,
  Let temple burn, or flax; an equal light
  Leaps in the flame from cedar-plank or weed:
  And love is fire. And when I say at need
  _I love thee_ ... mark!... _I love thee_--in thy sight
  I stand transfigured, glorified aright,
  With conscience of the new rays that proceed
  Out of my face toward thine. There's nothing low
  In love, when love the lowest: meanest creatures
  Who love God, God accepts while loving so.
  And what I _feel_, across the inferior features
  Of what I _am_, doth flash itself, and show
  How that great work of Love enhances Nature's.


XI.

  And therefore if to love can be desert,
  I am not all unworthy. Cheeks as pale
  As these you see, and trembling knees that fail
  To bear the burden of a heavy heart,--
  This weary minstrel-life that once was girt
  To climb Aornus, and can scarce avail
  To pipe now 'gainst the valley nightingale
  A melancholy music,--why advert
  To these things? O Beloved, it is plain
  I am not of thy worth nor for thy place!
  And yet, because I love thee, I obtain
  From that same love this vindicating grace,
  To live on still in love, and yet in vain,--
  To bless thee, yet renounce thee to thy face.


XII.

  Indeed this very love which is my boast,
  And which, when rising up from breast to brow,
  Doth crown me with a ruby large enow
  To draw men's eyes and prove the inner cost,--
  This love even, all my worth, to the uttermost,
  I should not love withal, unless that thou
  Hadst set me an example, shown me how,
  When first thine earnest eyes with mine were crossed,
  And love called love. And thus, I cannot speak
  Of love even, as a good thing of my own:
  Thy soul hath snatched up mine all faint and weak,
  And placed it by thee on a golden throne,--
  And that I love (O soul, we must be meek!)
  Is by thee only, whom I love alone.


XIII.

  And wilt thou have me fashion into speech
  The love I bear thee, finding words enough,
  And hold the torch out, while the winds are rough,
  Between our faces, to cast light on each?--
  I drop it at thy feet. I cannot teach
  My hand to hold my spirit so far off
  From myself--me--that I should bring thee proof
  In words, of love hid in me out of reach.
  Nay, let the silence of my womanhood
  Commend my woman-love to thy belief,--
  Seeing that I stand unwon, however wooed,
  And rend the garment of my life, in brief,
  By a most dauntless, voiceless fortitude,
  Lest one touch of this heart convey its grief.


XIV.

  If thou must love me, let it be for nought
  Except for love's sake only. Do not say
  "I love her for her smile--her look--her way
  Of speaking gently,--for a trick of thought
  That falls in well with mine, and certes brought
  A sense of pleasant ease on such a day"--
  For these things in themselves, Beloved, may
  Be changed, or change for thee,--and love, so wrought,
  May be unwrought so. Neither love me for
  Thine own dear pity's wiping my cheeks dry,--
  A creature might forget to weep, who bore
  Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby!
  But love me for love's sake, that evermore
  Thou mayst love on, through love's eternity.


XV.

  Accuse me not, beseech thee, that I wear
  Too calm and sad a face in front of thine;
  For we two look two ways, and cannot shine
  With the same sunlight on our brow and hair.
  On me thou lookest with no doubting care,
  As on a bee shut in a crystalline;
  Since sorrow hath shut me safe in love's divine,
  And to spread wing and fly in the outer air
  Were most impossible failure, if I strove
  To fail so. But I look on thee--on thee--
  Beholding, besides love, the end of love,
  Hearing oblivion beyond memory;
  As one who sits and gazes from above,
  Over the rivers to the bitter sea.


XVI.

  And yet, because thou overcomest so,
  Because thou art more noble and like a king,
  Thou canst prevail against my fears and fling
  Thy purple round me, till my heart shall grow
  Too close against thine heart henceforth to know
  How it shook when alone. Why, conquering
  May prove as lordly and complete a thing
  In lifting upward, as in crushing low!
  And as a vanquished soldier yields his sword
  To one who lifts him from the bloody earth,
  Even so, Beloved, I at last record,
  Here ends my strife. If _thou_ invite me forth,
  I rise above abasement at the word.
  Make thy love larger to enlarge my worth.


XVII.

  My poet, thou canst touch on all the notes
  God set between His After and Before,
  And strike up and strike off the general roar
  Of the rushing worlds a melody that floats
  In a serene air purely. Antidotes
  Of medicated music, answering for
  Mankind's forlornest uses, thou canst pour
  From thence into their ears. God's will devotes
  Thine to such ends, and mine to wait on thine.
  How, Dearest, wilt thou have me for most use?
  A hope, to sing by gladly? or a fine
  Sad memory, with thy songs to interfuse?
  A shade, in which to sing--of palm or pine?
  A grave, on which to rest from singing? Choose.


XVIII.

  I never gave a lock of hair away
  To a man, Dearest, except this to thee,
  Which now upon my fingers thoughtfully,
  I ring out to the full brown length and say
  "Take it." My day of youth went yesterday;
  My hair no longer bounds to my foot's glee,
  Nor plant I it from rose or myrtle-tree,
  As girls do, any more: it only may
  Now shade on two pale cheeks the mark of tears,
  Taught drooping from the head that hangs aside
  Through sorrow's trick. I thought the funeral-shears
  Would take this first, but Love is justified,--
  Take it thou,--finding pure, from all those years,
  The kiss my mother left here when she died.


XIX.

  The soul's Rialto hath its merchandise;
  I barter curl for curl upon that mart,
  And from my poet's forehead to my heart
  Receive this lock which outweighs argosies,--
  As purply black, as erst to Pindar's eyes
  The dim purpureal tresses gloomed athwart
  The nine white Muse-brows. For this counterpart, ...
  The bay-crown's shade, Beloved, I surmise,
  Still lingers on thy curl, it is so black!
  Thus, with a fillet of smooth-kissing breath,
  I tie the shadows safe from gliding back,
  And lay the gift where nothing hindereth;
  Here on my heart, as on thy brow, to lack
  No natural heat till mine grows cold in death.


XX.

  Beloved, my Beloved, when I think
  That thou wast in the world a year ago,
  What time I sat alone here in the snow
  And saw no footprint, heard the silence sink
  No moment at thy voice, but, link by link,
  Went counting all my chains as if that so
  They never could fall off at any blow
  Struck by thy possible hand,--why, thus I drink
  Of life's great cup of wonder! Wonderful,
  Never to feel thee thrill the day or night
  With personal act or speech,--nor ever cull
  Some prescience of thee with the blossoms white
  Thou sawest growing! Atheists are as dull,
  Who cannot guess God's presence out of sight.


XXI.

  Say over again, and yet once over again,
  That thou dost love me. Though the word repeated
  Should seem "a cuckoo-song," as thou dost treat it.
  Remember, never to the hill or plain,
  Valley and wood, without her cuckoo-strain
  Comes the fresh Spring in all her green completed.
  Beloved, I, amid the darkness greeted
  By a doubtful spirit-voice, in that doubt's pain
  Cry, "Speak once more--thou lovest!" Who can fear
  Too many stars, though each in heaven shall roll,
  Too many flowers, though each shall crown the year?
  Say thou dost love me, love me, love me--toll
  The silver iterance!--only minding, Dear,
  To love me also in silence with thy soul.


XXII.

  When our two souls stand up erect and strong,
  Face to face, silent, drawing nigh and nigher,
  Until the lengthening wings break into fire
  At either curved point,--what bitter wrong
  Can the earth do to us, that we should not long
  Be here contented? Think. In mounting higher,
  The angels would press on us and aspire
  To drop some golden orb of perfect song
  Into our deep, dear silence. Let us stay
  Rather on earth, Beloved,--where the unfit
  Contrarious moods of men recoil away
  And isolate pure spirits, and permit
  A place to stand and love in for a day,
  With darkness and the death-hour rounding it.


XXIII.

  Is it indeed so? If I lay here dead,
  Wouldst thou miss any life in losing mine?
  And would the sun for thee more coldly shine
  Because of grave-damps falling round my head?
  I marvelled, my Beloved, when I read
  Thy thought so in the letter. I am thine--
  But ... _so_ much to thee? Can I pour thy wine
  While my hands tremble? Then my soul, instead
  Of dreams of death, resumes life's lower range.
  Then, love me, Love! look on me--breathe on me!
  As brighter ladies do not count it strange,
  For love, to give up acres and degree,
  I yield the grave for thy sake, and exchange
  My near sweet view of Heaven, for earth with thee!


XXIV.

  Let the world's sharpness, like a clasping knife,
  Shut in upon itself and do no harm
  In this close hand of Love, now soft and warm,
  And let us hear no sound of human strife
  After the click of the shutting. Life to life--
  I lean upon thee, Dear, without alarm,
  And feel as safe as guarded by a charm
  Against the stab of worldlings, who if rife
  Are weak to injure. Very-whitely still
  The lilies of our lives may reassure
  Their blossoms from their roots, accessible
  Alone to heavenly dews that drop not fewer
  Growing straight, out of man's reach, on the hill.
  God only, who made us rich, can make us poor.


XXV.

  A heavy heart, Beloved, have I borne
  From year to year until I saw thy face,
  And sorrow after sorrow took the place
  Of all those natural joys as lightly worn
  As the stringed pearls, each lifted in its turn
  By a beating heart at dance-time. Hopes apace
  Were changed to long despairs, till God's own grace
  Could scarcely lift above the world forlorn
  My heavy heart. Then _thou_ didst bid me bring
  And let it drop adown thy calmly great
  Deep being! Fast it sinketh, as a thing
  Which its own nature doth precipitate,
  While thine doth close above it, mediating
  Betwixt the stars and the unaccomplished fate.


XXVI.

  I lived with visions for my company
  Instead of men and women, years ago,
  And found them gentle mates, nor thought to know
  A sweeter music than they played to me.
  But soon their trailing purple was not free
  Of this world's dust, their lutes did silent grow,
  And I myself grew faint and blind below
  Their vanishing eyes. Then THOU didst come--to be,
  Beloved, what they seemed. Their shining fronts,
  Their songs, their splendours (better, yet the same,
  As river-water hallowed into fonts),
  Met in thee, and from out thee overcame
  My soul with satisfaction of all wants:
  Because God's gifts put man's best dreams to shame.


XXVII.

  My own Beloved, who hast lifted me
  From this drear flat of earth where I was thrown,
  And, in betwixt the languid ringlets, blown
  A life-breath, till the forehead hopefully
  Shines out again, as all the angels see,
  Before thy saving kiss! My own, my own,
  Who camest to me when the world was gone,
  And I who looked for only God, found _thee_!
  I find thee; I am safe, and strong, and glad.
  As one who stands in dewless asphodel
  Looks backward on the tedious time he had
  In the upper life,--so I, with bosom-swell,
  Make witness, here, between the good and bad,
  That Love, as strong as Death, retrieves as well.


XXVIII.

  My letters! all dead paper, mute and white!
  And yet they seem alive and quivering
  Against my tremulous hands which loose the string
  And let them drop down on my knee to-night.
  This said,--he wished to have me in his sight
  Once, as a friend: this fixed a day in spring
  To come and touch my hand ... a simple thing,
  Yet I wept for it!--this, ... the paper's light ...
  Said, _Dear, I love thee_; and I sank and quailed
  As if God's future thundered on my past.
  This said, _I am thine_--and so its ink has paled
  With lying at my heart that beat too fast.
  And this ... O Love, thy words have ill availed
  If, what this said, I dared repeat at last!


XXIX.

  I think of thee!--my thoughts do twine and bud
  About thee, as wild vines, about a tree,
  Put out broad leaves, and soon there's nought to see
  Except the straggling green which hides the wood.
  Yet, O my palm-tree, be it understood
  I will not have my thoughts instead of thee
  Who art dearer, better! Rather, instantly
  Renew thy presence; as a strong tree should,
  Rustle thy boughs and set thy trunk all bare,
  And let these bands of greenery which insphere thee
  Drop heavily down,--burst, shattered, everywhere!
  Because, in this deep joy to see and hear thee
  And breathe within thy shadow a new air,
  I do not think of thee--I am too near thee.


XXX.

  I see thine image through my tears to-night,
  And yet to-day I saw thee smiling. How
  Refer the cause?--Beloved, is it thou
  Or I, who makes me sad? The acolyte
  Amid the chanted joy and thankful rite
  May so fall flat, with pale insensate brow,
  On the altar-stair. I hear thy voice and vow,
  Perplexed, uncertain, since thou art out of sight,
  As he, in his swooning ears, the choir's Amen.
  Beloved, dost thou love? or did I see all
  The glory as I dreamed, and fainted when
  Too vehement light dilated my ideal,
  For my soul's eyes? Will that light come again,
  As now these tears come--falling hot and real?


XXXI.

  Thou comest! all is said without a word.
  I sit beneath thy looks, as children do
  In the noon-sun, with souls that tremble through
  Their happy eyelids from an unaverred
  Yet prodigal inward joy. Behold, I erred
  In that last doubt! and yet I cannot rue
  The sin most, but the occasion--that we two
  Should for a moment stand unministered
  By a mutual presence. Ah, keep near and close,
  Thou dovelike help! and, when my fears would rise,
  With thy broad heart serenely interpose:
  Brood down with thy divine sufficiencies
  These thoughts which tremble when bereft of those,
  Like callow birds left desert to the skies.


XXXII.

  The first time that the sun rose on thine oath
  To love me, I looked forward to the moon
  To slacken all those bonds which seemed too soon
  And quickly tied to make a lasting troth.
  Quick-loving hearts, I thought, may quickly loathe;
  And, looking on myself, I seemed not one
  For such man's love!--more like an out-of-tune
  Worn viol, a good singer would be wroth
  To spoil his song with, and which, snatched in haste,
  Is laid down at the first ill-sounding note.
  I did not wrong myself so, but I placed
  A wrong on _thee_. For perfect strains may float
  'Neath master-hands, from instruments defaced,--
  And great souls, at one stroke, may do and doat.


XXXIII.

  Yes, call me by my pet-name! let me hear
  The name I used to run at, when a child,
  From innocent play, and leave the cowslips piled,
  To glance up in some face that proved me dear
  With the look of its eyes. I miss the clear
  Fond voices which, being drawn and reconciled
  Into the music of Heaven's undefiled,
  Call me no longer. Silence on the bier,
  While I call God--call God!--So let thy mouth
  Be heir to those who are now exanimate.
  Gather the north flowers to complete the south,
  And catch the early love up in the late.
  Yes, call me by that name,--and I, in truth,
  With the same heart, will answer and not wait.


XXXIV.

  With the same heart, I said, I'll answer thee
  As those, when thou shalt call me by my name--
  Lo, the vain promise! is the same, the same,
  Perplexed and ruffled by life's strategy?
  When called before, I told how hastily
  I dropped my flowers or brake off from a game,
  To run and answer with the smile that came
  At play last moment, and went on with me
  Through my obedience. When I answer now,
  I drop a grave thought, break from solitude;
  Yet still my heart goes to thee--ponder how--
  Not as to a single good, but all my good!
  Lay thy hand on it, best one, and allow
  That no child's foot could run fast as this blood.


XXXV.

  If I leave all for thee, wilt thou exchange
  And be all to me? Shall I never miss
  Home-talk and blessing and the common kiss
  That comes to each in turn, nor count it strange,
  When I look up, to drop on a new range
  Of walls and floors, another home than this?
  Nay, wilt thou fill that place by me which is
  Filled by dead eyes too tender to know change?
  That's hardest. If to conquer love, has tried,
  To conquer grief, tries more, as all things prove;
  For grief indeed is love and grief beside.
  Alas, I have grieved so I am hard to love.
  Yet love me--wilt thou? Open thine heart wide,
  And fold within the wet wings of thy dove.


XXXVI.

  When we met first and loved, I did not build
  Upon the event with marble. Could it mean
  To last, a love set pendulous between
  Sorrow and sorrow? Nay, I rather thrilled,
  Distrusting every light that seemed to gild
  The onward path, and feared to overlean
  A finger even. And, though I have grown serene
  And strong since then, I think that God has willed
  A still renewable fear ... O love, O troth ...
  Lest these enclasped hands should never hold,
  This mutual kiss drop down between us both
  As an unowned thing, once the lips being cold.
  And Love, be false! if _he_, to keep one oath,
  Must lose one joy, by his life's star foretold.


XXXVII.

  Pardon, oh, pardon, that my soul should make,
  Of all that strong divineness which I know
  For thine and thee, an image only so
  Formed of the sand, and fit to shift and break.
  It is that distant years which did not take
  Thy sovranty, recoiling with a blow,
  Have forced my swimming brain to undergo
  Their doubt and dread, and blindly to forsake
  Thy purity of likeness and distort
  Thy worthiest love to a worthless counterfeit:
  As if a shipwrecked Pagan, safe in port,
  His guardian sea-god to commemorate,
  Should set a sculptured porpoise, gills a-snort
  And vibrant tail, within the temple-gate.


XXXVIII.

  First time he kissed me, he but only kissed
  The fingers of this hand wherewith I write;
  And ever since, it grew more clean and white,
  Slow to world-greetings, quick with its "Oh, list,"
  When the angels speak. A ring of amethyst
  I could not wear here, plainer to my sight,
  Than that first kiss. The second passed in height
  The first, and sought the forehead, and half missed,
  Half falling on the hair. O beyond meed!
  That was the chrism of love, which love's own crown,
  With sanctifying sweetness, did precede.
  The third upon my lips was folded down
  In perfect, purple state; since when, indeed,
  I have been proud and said, "My love, my own."


XXXIX.

  Because thou hast the power and own'st the grace
  To look through and behind this mask of me
  (Against which years have beat thus blanchingly
  With their rains), and behold my soul's true face,
  The dim and weary witness of life's race,--
  Because thou hast the faith and love to see,
  Through that same soul's distracting lethargy,
  The patient angel waiting for a place
  In the new Heavens,--because nor sin nor woe,
  Nor God's infliction, nor death's neighbourhood,
  Nor all which others viewing, turn to go,
  Nor all which makes me tired of all, self-viewed,--
  Nothing repels thee, ... Dearest, teach me so
  To pour out gratitude, as thou dost, good!


XL.

  Oh, yes! they love through all this world of ours!
  I will not gainsay love, called love forsooth.
  I have heard love talked in my early youth,
  And since, not so long back but that the flowers
  Then gathered, smell still. Mussulmans and Giaours
  Throw kerchiefs at a smile, and have no ruth
  For any weeping. Polypheme's white tooth
  Slips on the nut if, after frequent showers,
  The shell is over-smooth,--and not so much
  Will turn the thing called love, aside to hate
  Or else to oblivion. But thou art not such
  A lover, my Beloved! thou canst wait
  Through sorrow and sickness, to bring souls to touch,
  And think it soon when others cry "Too late."


XLI.

  I thank all who have loved me in their hearts,
  With thanks and love from mine. Deep thanks to all
  Who paused a little near the prison-wall
  To hear my music in its louder parts
  Ere they went onward, each one to the mart's
  Or temple's occupation, beyond call.
  But thou, who, in my voice's sink and fall
  When the sob took it, thy divinest Art's
  Own instrument didst drop down at thy foot
  To hearken what I said between my tears, ...
  Instruct me how to thank thee! Oh, to shoot
  My soul's full meaning into future years,
  That _they_ should lend it utterance, and salute
  Love that endures, from Life that disappears!


XLII.

  "_My future will not copy fair my past_"--
  I wrote that once; and thinking at my side
  My ministering life-angel justified
  The word by his appealing look upcast
  To the white throne of God, I turned at last,
  And there, instead, saw thee, not unallied
  To angels in thy soul! Then I, long tried
  By natural ills, received the comfort fast,
  While budding, at thy sight, my pilgrim's staff
  Gave out green leaves with morning dews impearled.
  I seek no copy now of life's first half:
  Leave here the pages with long musing curled,
  And write me new my future's epigraph,
  New angel mine, unhoped for in the world!


XLIII.

  How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.
  I love thee to the depth and breadth and height
  My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight
  For the ends of Being and ideal Grace.
  I love thee to the level of everyday's
  Most quiet need, by sun and candlelight.
  I love thee freely, as men strive for Right;
  I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise.
  I love thee with the passion put to use
  In my old griefs, and with my childhood's faith.
  I love thee with a love I seemed to lose
  With my lost saints,--I love thee with the breath,
  Smiles, tears, of all my life!--and, if God choose,
  I shall but love thee better after death.


XLIV.

  Beloved, thou hast brought me many flowers
  Plucked in the garden, all the summer through
  And winter, and it seemed as if they grew
  In this close room, nor missed the sun and showers.
  So, in the like name of that love of ours,
  Take back these thoughts which here unfolded too,
  And which on warm and cold days I withdrew
  From my heart's ground. Indeed, those beds and bowers
  Be overgrown with bitter weeds and rue,
  And wait thy weeding; yet here's eglantine,
  Here's ivy!--take them, as I used to do
  Thy flowers, and keep them where they shall not pine.
  Instruct thine eyes to keep their colours true,
  And tell thy soul their roots are left in mine.




CASA GUIDI WINDOWS

A Poem, IN TWO PARTS


ADVERTISEMENT TO THE FIRST EDITION.


This poem contains the impressions of the writer upon events in
Tuscany of which she was a witness. "From a window," the critic may
demur. She bows to the objection in the very title of her work. No
continuous narrative nor exposition of political philosophy is
attempted by her. It is a simple story of personal impressions, whose
only value is in the intensity with which they were received, as
proving her warm affection for a beautiful and unfortunate country,
and the sincerity with which they are related, as indicating her own
good faith and freedom from partisanship.

Of the two parts of this poem, the first was written nearly three
years ago, while the second resumes the actual situation of 1851. The
discrepancy between the two parts is a sufficient guarantee to the
public of the truthfulness of the writer, who, though she certainly
escaped the epidemic "falling sickness" of enthusiasm for Pio Nono,
takes shame upon herself that she believed, like a woman, some royal
oaths, and lost sight of the probable consequences of some obvious
popular defects. If the discrepancy should be painful to the reader,
let him understand that to the writer it has been more so. But such
discrepancies we are called upon to accept at every hour by the
conditions of our nature, implying the interval between aspiration
and performance, between faith and disillusion, between hope and
fact.

  "O trusted broken prophecy,
  O richest fortune sourly crost,
  Born for the future, to the future lost!"

Nay, not lost to the future in this case. The future of Italy shall
not be disinherited.

FLORENCE, 1851.




CASA GUIDI WINDOWS.


PART I.

  I heard last night a little child go singing
    'Neath Casa Guidi windows, by the church,
  _O bella liberta, O bella!_--stringing
    The same words still on notes he went in search
  So high for, you concluded the upspringing
    Of such a nimble bird to sky from perch
  Must leave the whole bush in a tremble green,
    And that the heart of Italy must beat,
  While such a voice had leave to rise serene
    'Twixt church and palace of a Florence street:
  A little child, too, who not long had been
    By mother's finger steadied on his feet,
  And still _O bella liberta_ he sang.

  Then I thought, musing, of the innumerous
    Sweet songs which still for Italy outrang
  From older singers' lips who sang not thus
    Exultingly and purely, yet, with pang
  Fast sheathed in music, touched the heart of us
    So finely that the pity scarcely pained.
  I thought how Filicaja led on others,
    Bewailers for their Italy enchained,
  And how they called her childless among mothers,
    Widow of empires, ay, and scarce refrained
  Cursing her beauty to her face, as brothers
    Might a shamed sister's,--"Had she been less fair
  She were less wretched;"--how, evoking so
    From congregated wrong and heaped despair
  Of men and women writhing under blow,
    Harrowed and hideous in a filthy lair,
  Some personating Image wherein woe
    Was wrapt in beauty from offending much,
  They called it Cybele, or Niobe,
    Or laid it corpse-like on a bier for such,
  Where all the world might drop for Italy
    Those cadenced tears which burn not where they touch,--
  "Juliet of nations, canst thou die as we?
    And was the violet crown that crowned thy head
  So over-large, though new buds made it rough,
    It slipped down and across thine eyelids dead,
  O sweet, fair Juliet?" Of such songs enough,
    Too many of such complaints! behold, instead,
  Void at Verona, Juliet's marble trough:[2]
    As void as that is, are all images
  Men set between themselves and actual wrong,
    To catch the weight of pity, meet the stress
  Of conscience,--since 't is easier to gaze long
    On mournful masks and sad effigies
  Than on real, live, weak creatures crushed by strong.

    For me who stand in Italy to-day
  Where worthier poets stood and sang before,
    I kiss their footsteps yet their words gainsay.
  I can but muse in hope upon this shore
    Of golden Arno as it shoots away
  Through Florence' heart beneath her bridges four:
    Bent bridges, seeming to strain off like bows,
  And tremble while the arrowy undertide
    Shoots on and cleaves the marble as it goes,
  And strikes up palace-walls on either side,
    And froths the cornice out in glittering rows,
  With doors and windows quaintly multiplied,
    And terrace-sweeps, and gazers upon all,
  By whom if flower or kerchief were thrown out
    From any lattice there, the same would fall
  Into the river underneath, no doubt,
    It runs so close and fast 'twixt wall and wall.
  How beautiful! the mountains from without
    In silence listen for the word said next.
  What word will men say,--here where Giotto planted
    His campanile like an unperplexed
  Fine question Heavenward, touching the things granted
    A noble people who, being greatly vexed
  In act, in aspiration keep undaunted?
    What word will God say? Michel's Night and Day
  And Dawn and Twilight wait in marble scorn[3]
    Like dogs upon a dunghill, couched on clay
  From whence the Medicean stamp's outworn,
    The final putting off of all such sway
  By all such hands, and freeing of the unborn
    In Florence and the great world outside Florence.
  Three hundred years his patient statues wait
    In that small chapel of the dim Saint Lawrence:
  Day's eyes are breaking bold and passionate
    Over his shoulder, and will flash abhorrence
  On darkness and with level looks meet fate,
    When once loose from that marble film of theirs;
  The Night has wild dreams in her sleep, the Dawn
    Is haggard as the sleepless, Twilight wears
  A sort of horror; as the veil withdrawn
    'Twixt the artist's soul and works had left them heirs
  Of speechless thoughts which would not quail nor fawn,
    Of angers and contempts, of hope and love:
  For not without a meaning did he place
    The princely Urbino on the seat above
  With everlasting shadow on his face,
    While the slow dawns and twilights disapprove
  The ashes of his long-extinguished race
    Which never more shall clog the feet of men.
  I do believe, divinest Angelo,
    That winter-hour in Via Larga, when
  They bade thee build a statue up in snow[4]
    And straight that marvel of thine art again
  Dissolved beneath the sun's Italian glow,
    Thine eyes, dilated with the plastic passion,
  Thawing too in drops of wounded manhood, since,
    To mock alike thine art and indignation,
  Laughed at the palace-window the new prince,--
    ("Aha! this genius needs for exaltation,
  When all's said and however the proud may wince,
    A little marble from our princely mines!")
  I do believe that hour thou laughedst too
    For the whole sad world and for thy Florentines,
  After those few tears, which were only few!
    That as, beneath the sun, the grand white lines
  Of thy snow-statue trembled and withdrew,--
    The head, erect as Jove's, being palsied first,
  The eyelids flattened, the full brow turned blank,
    The right-hand, raised but now as if it cursed,
  Dropt, a mere snowball, (till the people sank
    Their voices, though a louder laughter burst
  From the royal window)--thou couldst proudly thank
    God and the prince for promise and presage,
  And laugh the laugh back, I think verily,
    Thine eyes being purged by tears of righteous rage
  To read a wrong into a prophecy,
    And measure a true great man's heritage
  Against a mere great-duke's posterity.
    I think thy soul said then, "I do not need
  A princedom and its quarries, after all;
    For if I write, paint, carve a word, indeed,
  On book or board or dust, on floor or wall,
    The same is kept of God who taketh heed
  That not a letter of the meaning fall
    Or ere it touch and teach His world's deep heart,
  Outlasting, therefore, all your lordships, sir!
    So keep your stone, beseech you, for your part,
  To cover up your grave-place and refer
    The proper titles; _I_ live by my art.
  The thought I threw into this snow shall stir
    This gazing people when their gaze is done;
  And the tradition of your act and mine,
    When all the snow is melted in the sun,
  Shall gather up, for unborn men, a sign
    Of what is the true princedom,--ay, and none
  Shall laugh that day, except the drunk with wine."

    Amen, great Angelo! the day's at hand.
  If many laugh not on it, shall we weep?
    Much more we must not, let us understand.
  Through rhymers sonneteering in their sleep
    And archaists mumbling dry bones up the land
  And sketchers lauding ruined towns a-heap,--
    Through all that drowsy hum of voices smooth,
  The hopeful bird mounts carolling from brake,
    The hopeful child, with leaps to catch his growth,
  Sings open-eyed for liberty's sweet sake:
    And I, a singer also from my youth,
  Prefer to sing with these who are awake,
    With birds, with babes, with men who will not fear
  The baptism of the holy morning dew,
    (And many of such wakers now are here,
  Complete in their anointed manhood, who
    Will greatly dare and greatlier persevere,)
  Than join those old thin voices with my new,
    And sigh for Italy with some safe sigh
  Cooped up in music 'twixt an oh and ah,--
    Nay, hand in hand with that young child, will I
  Go singing rather, "_Bella liberta_,"
    Than, with those poets, croon the dead or cry
  "_Se tu men bella fossi, Italia!_"

    "Less wretched if less fair." Perhaps a truth
  Is so far plain in this, that Italy,
    Long trammelled with the purple of her youth
  Against her age's ripe activity,
    Sits still upon her tombs, without death's ruth
  But also without life's brave energy.
    "Now tell us what is Italy?" men ask:
  And others answer, "Virgil, Cicero,
    Catullus, Caesar." What beside? to task
  The memory closer--"Why, Boccaccio,
    Dante, Petrarca,"--and if still the flask
  Appears to yield its wine by drops too slow,--
    "Angelo, Raffael, Pergolese,"--all
  Whose strong hearts beat through stone, or charged again
    The paints with fire of souls electrical,
  Or broke up heaven for music. What more then?
    Why, then, no more. The chaplet's last beads fall
  In naming the last saintship within ken,
    And, after that, none prayeth in the land.
  Alas, this Italy has too long swept
    Heroic ashes up for hour-glass sand;
  Of her own past, impassioned nympholept!
    Consenting to be nailed here by the hand
  To the very bay-tree under which she stept
    A queen of old, and plucked a leafy branch;
  And, licensing the world too long indeed
    To use her broad phylacteries to staunch
  And stop her bloody lips, she takes no heed
    How one clear word would draw an avalanche
  Of living sons around her, to succeed
    The vanished generations. Can she count
  These oil-eaters with large live mobile mouths
    Agape for macaroni, in the amount
  Of consecrated heroes of her south's
    Bright rosary? The pitcher at the fount,
  The gift of gods, being broken, she much loathes
    To let the ground-leaves of the place confer
  A natural bowl. So henceforth she would seem
    No nation, but the poet's pensioner,
  With alms from every land of song and dream,
    While aye her pipers sadly pipe of her
  Until their proper breaths, in that extreme
    Of sighing, split the reed on which they played:
  Of which, no more. But never say "no more"
    To Italy's life! Her memories undismayed
  Still argue "evermore;" her graves implore
    Her future to be strong and not afraid;
  Her very statues send their looks before.

    We do not serve the dead--the past is past.
  God lives, and lifts His glorious mornings up
    Before the eyes of men awake at last,
  Who put away the meats they used to sup,
    And down upon the dust of earth outcast
  The dregs remaining of the ancient cup,
    Then turn to wakeful prayer and worthy act.
  The Dead, upon their awful 'vantage ground,
    The sun not in their faces, shall abstract
  No more our strength; we will not be discrowned
    As guardians of their crowns, nor deign transact
  A barter of the present, for a sound
    Of good so counted in the foregone days.
  O Dead, ye shall no longer cling to us
    With rigid hands of desiccating praise,
  And drag us backward by the garment thus,
    To stand and laud you in long-drawn virelays!
  We will not henceforth be oblivious
    Of our own lives, because ye lived before,
  Nor of our acts, because ye acted well.
    We thank you that ye first unlatched the door,
  But will not make it inaccessible
    By thankings on the threshold any more.
  We hurry onward to extinguish hell
    With our fresh souls, our younger hope, and God's
  Maturity of purpose. Soon shall we
    Die also! and, that then our periods
  Of life may round themselves to memory
    As smoothly as on our graves the burial-sods,
  We now must look to it to excel as ye,
    And bear our age as far, unlimited
  By the last mind-mark; so, to be invoked
    By future generations, as their Dead.

  'T is true that when the dust of death has choked
    A great man's voice, the common words he said
  Turn oracles, the common thoughts he yoked
    Like horses, draw like griffins: this is true
  And acceptable. I, too, should desire,
    When men make record, with the flowers they strew,
  "Savonarola's soul went out in fire
    Upon our Grand-duke's piazza,[5] and burned through
  A moment first, or ere he did expire,
    The veil betwixt the right and wrong, and showed
  How near God sat and judged the judges there,--"
    Upon the self-same pavement overstrewed
  To cast my violets with as reverent care,
    And prove that all the winters which have snowed
  Cannot snow out the scent from stones and air,
    Of a sincere man's virtues. This was he,
  Savonarola, who, while Peter sank
    With his whole boat-load, called courageously
  "Wake Christ, wake Christ!"--who, having tried the tank
    Of old church-waters used for baptistry
  Ere Luther came to spill them, swore they stank;
    Who also by a princely deathbed cried,
  "Loose Florence, or God will not loose thy soul!"
    Then fell back the Magnificent and died
  Beneath the star-look shooting from the cowl,
    Which turned to wormwood-bitterness the wide
  Deep sea of his ambitions. It were foul
    To grudge Savonarola and the rest
  Their violets: rather pay them quick and fresh!
    The emphasis of death makes manifest
  The eloquence of action in our flesh;
    And men who, living, were but dimly guessed,
  When once free from their life's entangled mesh,
    Show their full length in graves, or oft indeed
  Exaggerate their stature, in the flat,
    To noble admirations which exceed
  Most nobly, yet will calculate in that
    But accurately. We, who are the seed
  Of buried creatures, if we turned and spat
    Upon our antecedents, we were vile.
  Bring violets rather. If these had not walked
    Their furlong, could we hope to walk our mile?
  Therefore bring violets. Yet if we self-baulked
    Stand still, a-strewing violets all the while,
  These moved in vain, of whom we have vainly talked.
    So rise up henceforth with a cheerful smile,
  And having strewn the violets, reap the corn,
    And having reaped and garnered, bring the plough
  And draw new furrows 'neath the healthy morn,
    And plant the great Hereafter in this Now.

  Of old 't was so. How step by step was worn,
    As each man gained on each securely!--how
  Each by his own strength sought his own Ideal,--
    The ultimate Perfection leaning bright
  From out the sun and stars to bless the leal
    And earnest search of all for Fair and Right
  Through doubtful forms by earth accounted real!
    Because old Jubal blew into delight
  The souls of men with clear-piped melodies,
    If youthful Asaph were content at most
  To draw from Jubal's grave, with listening eyes,
    Traditionary music's floating ghost
  Into the grass-grown silence, were it wise?
    And was 't not wiser, Jubal's breath being lost,
  That Miriam clashed her cymbals to surprise
    The sun between her white arms flung apart,
  With new glad golden sounds? that David's strings
    O'erflowed his hand with music from his heart?
  So harmony grows full from many springs,
    And happy accident turns holy art.

  You enter, in your Florence wanderings,
    The church of Saint Maria Novella. Pass
  The left stair, where at plague-time Machiavel[6]
    Saw One with set fair face as in a glass,
  Dressed out against the fear of death and hell,
    Rustling her silks in pauses of the mass,
  To keep the thought off how her husband fell,
    When she left home, stark dead across her feet,--
  The stair leads up to what the Orgagnas save
    Of Dante's daemons; you, in passing it,
  Ascend the right stair from the farther nave
    To muse in a small chapel scarcely lit
  By Cimabue's Virgin. Bright and brave,
    That picture was accounted, mark, of old:
  A king stood bare before its sovran grace,[7]
    A reverent people shouted to behold
  The picture, not the king, and even the place
    Containing such a miracle grew bold,
  Named the Glad Borgo from that beauteous face
    Which thrilled the artist, after work, to think
  His own ideal Mary-smile should stand
    So very near him,--he, within the brink
  Of all that glory, let in by his hand
    With too divine a rashness! Yet none shrink
  Who come to gaze here now; albeit 't was planned
    Sublimely in the thought's simplicity:
  The Lady, throned in empyreal state,
    Minds only the young Babe upon her knee,
  While sidelong angels bear the royal weight,
    Prostrated meekly, smiling tenderly
  Oblivion of their wings; the Child thereat
    Stretching its hand like God. If any should,
  Because of some stiff draperies and loose joints,
    Gaze scorn down from the heights of Raffaelhood
  On Cimabue's picture,--Heaven anoints
    The head of no such critic, and his blood
  The poet's curse strikes full on and appoints
    To ague and cold spasms for evermore.
  A noble picture! worthy of the shout
    Wherewith along the streets the people bore
  Its cherub-faces which the sun threw out
    Until they stooped and entered the church door.
  Yet rightly was young Giotto talked about,
    Whom Cimabue found among the sheep,[8]
  And knew, as gods know gods, and carried home
    To paint the things he had painted, with a deep
  And fuller insight, and so overcome
    His chapel-Lady with a heavenlier sweep
  Of light: for thus we mount into the sum
    Of great things known or acted. I hold, too,
  That Cimabue smiled upon the lad
    At the first stroke which passed what he could do,
  Or else his Virgin's smile had never had
    Such sweetness in 't. All great men who foreknew
  Their heirs in art, for art's sake have been glad,
    And bent their old white heads as if uncrowned,
  Fanatics of their pure Ideals still
    Far more than of their triumphs, which were found
  With some less vehement struggle of the will.
    If old Margheritone trembled, swooned
  And died despairing at the open sill
    Of other men's achievements (who achieved,
  By loving art beyond the master), he
    Was old Margheritone, and conceived
  Never, at first youth and most ecstasy,
    A Virgin like that dream of one, which heaved
  The death-sigh from his heart. If wistfully
    Margheritone sickened at the smell
  Of Cimabue's laurel, let him go!
    For Cimabue stood up very well
  In spite of Giotto's, and Angelico
    The artist-saint kept smiling in his cell
  The smile with which he welcomed the sweet slow
    Inbreak of angels (whitening through the dim
  That he might paint them), while the sudden sense
    Of Raffael's future was revealed to him
  By force of his own fair works' competence.
    The same blue waters where the dolphins swim
  Suggest the tritons. Through the blue Immense
    Strike out, all swimmers! cling not in the way
  Of one another, so to sink; but learn
    The strong man's impulse, catch the freshening spray
  He throws up in his motions, and discern
    By his clear westering eye, the time of day.
  Thou, God, hast set us worthy gifts to earn
    Besides Thy heaven and Thee! and when I say
  There's room here for the weakest man alive
    To live and die, there's room too, I repeat,
  For all the strongest to live well, and strive
    Their own way, by their individual heat,--
  Like some new bee-swarm leaving the old hive,
    Despite the wax which tempts so violet-sweet.
  Then let the living live, the dead retain
    Their grave-cold flowers!--though honour's best supplied
  By bringing actions, to prove theirs not vain.

    Cold graves, we say? it shall be testified
  That living men who burn in heart and brain,
    Without the dead were colder. If we tried
  To sink the past beneath our feet, be sure
    The future would not stand. Precipitate
  This old roof from the shrine, and, insecure,
    The nesting swallows fly off, mate from mate.
  How scant the gardens, if the graves were fewer!
    The tall green poplars grew no longer straight
  Whose tops not looked to Troy. Would any fight
    For Athens, and not swear by Marathon?
  Who dared build temples, without tombs in sight?
    Or live, without some dead man's benison?
  Or seek truth, hope for good, and strive for right,
    If, looking up, he saw not in the sun
  Some angel of the martyrs all day long
    Standing and waiting? Your last rhythm will need
  Your earliest key-note. Could I sing this song,
    If my dead masters had not taken heed
  To help the heavens and earth to make me strong,
    As the wind ever will find out some reed
  And touch it to such issues as belong
    To such a frail thing? None may grudge the Dead
  Libations from full cups. Unless we choose
    To look back to the hills behind us spread,
  The plains before us sadden and confuse;
    If orphaned, we are disinherited.

  I would but turn these lachrymals to use,
    And pour fresh oil in from the olive-grove,
  To furnish them as new lamps. Shall I say
    What made my heart beat with exulting love
  A few weeks back?--
                      The day was such a day
    As Florence owes the sun. The sky above,
  Its weight upon the mountains seemed to lay,
    And palpitate in glory, like a dove
  Who has flown too fast, full-hearted--take away
    The image! for the heart of man beat higher
  That day in Florence, flooding all her streets
    And piazzas with a tumult and desire.
  The people, with accumulated heats
    And faces turned one way, as if one fire
  Both drew and flushed them, left their ancient beats
    And went up toward the palace-Pitti wall
  To thank their Grand-duke who, not quite of course,
    Had graciously permitted, at their call,
  The citizens to use their civic force
    To guard their civic homes. So, one and all,
  The Tuscan cities streamed up to the source
    Of this new good at Florence, taking it
  As good so far, presageful of more good,--
    The first torch of Italian freedom, lit
  To toss in the next tiger's face who should
    Approach too near them in a greedy fit,--
  The first pulse of an even flow of blood
    To prove the level of Italian veins
  Towards rights perceived and granted. How we gazed
    From Casa Guidi windows while, in trains
  Of orderly procession--banners raised,
    And intermittent bursts of martial strains
  Which died upon the shout, as if amazed
    By gladness beyond music--they passed on!
  The Magistracy, with insignia, passed,--
    And all the people shouted in the sun,
  And all the thousand windows which had cast
    A ripple of silks in blue and scarlet down
  (As if the houses overflowed at last),
    Seemed growing larger with fair heads and eyes.
  The Lawyers passed,--and still arose the shout,
    And hands broke from the windows to surprise
  Those grave calm brows with bay-tree leaves thrown out.
    The Priesthood passed,--the friars with worldly-wise
  Keen sidelong glances from their beards about
    The street to see who shouted; many a monk
  Who takes a long rope in the waist, was there:
    Whereat the popular exultation drunk
  With indrawn "vivas" the whole sunny air,
    While through the murmuring windows rose and sunk
  A cloud of kerchiefed hands,--"The church makes fair
    Her welcome in the new Pope's name." Ensued
  The black sign of the "Martyrs"--(name no name,
    But count the graves in silence). Next were viewed
  The Artists; next, the Trades; and after came
    The People,--flag and sign, and rights as good--
  And very loud the shout was for that same
    Motto, "Il popolo." IL POPOLO,--
  The word means dukedom, empire, majesty,
    And kings in such an hour might read it so.
  And next, with banners, each in his degree,
    Deputed representatives a-row
  Of every separate state of Tuscany:
    Siena's she-wolf, bristling on the fold
  Of the first flag, preceded Pisa's hare,
    And Massa's lion floated calm in gold,
  Pienza's following with his silver stare,
    Arezzo's steed pranced clear from bridle-hold,--
  And well might shout our Florence, greeting there
    These, and more brethren. Last, the world had sent
  The various children of her teeming flanks--
    Greeks, English, French--as if to a parliament
  Of lovers of her Italy in ranks,
    Each bearing its land's symbol reverent;
  At which the stones seemed breaking into thanks
    And rattling up the sky, such sounds in proof
  Arose; the very house-walls seemed to bend;
    The very windows, up from door to roof,
  Flashed out a rapture of bright heads, to mend
    With passionate looks the gesture's whirling off
  A hurricane of leaves. Three hours did end
    While all these passed; and ever in the crowd,
  Rude men, unconscious of the tears that kept
    Their beards moist, shouted; some few laughed aloud,
  And none asked any why they laughed and wept:
    Friends kissed each other's cheeks, and foes long vowed
  More warmly did it; two-months' babies leapt
    Right upward in their mother's arms, whose black
  Wide glittering eyes looked elsewhere; lovers pressed
    Each before either, neither glancing back;
  And peasant maidens smoothly 'tired and tressed
    Forgot to finger on their throats the slack
  Great pearl-strings; while old blind men would not rest,
    But pattered with their staves and slid their shoes
  Along the stones, and smiled as if they saw.
    O heaven, I think that day had noble use
  Among God's days! So near stood Right and Law,
    Both mutually forborne! Law would not bruise
  Nor Right deny, and each in reverent awe
    Honoured the other. And if, ne'ertheless,
  That good day's sun delivered to the vines
    No charta, and the liberal Duke's excess
  Did scarce exceed a Guelf's or Ghibelline's
    In any special actual righteousness
  Of what that day he granted, still the signs
    Are good and full of promise, we must say,
  When multitudes approach their kings with prayers
    And kings concede their people's right to pray
  Both in one sunshine. Griefs are not despairs,
    So uttered, nor can royal claims dismay
  When men from humble homes and ducal chairs
    Hate wrong together. It was well to view
  Those banners ruffled in a ruler's face
    Inscribed, "Live freedom, union, and all true
  Brave patriots who are aided by God's grace!"
    Nor was it ill when Leopoldo drew
  His little children to the window-place
    He stood in at the Pitti, to suggest
  _They_ too should govern as the people willed.
    What a cry rose then! some, who saw the best,
  Declared his eyes filled up and overfilled
    With good warm human tears which unrepressed
  Ran down. I like his face; the forehead's build
    Has no capacious genius, yet perhaps
  Sufficient comprehension,--mild and sad,
    And careful nobly,--not with care that wraps
  Self-loving hearts, to stifle and make mad,
    But careful with the care that shuns a lapse
  Of faith and duty, studious not to add
    A burden in the gathering of a gain.
  And so, God save the Duke, I say with those
    Who that day shouted it; and while dukes reign,
  May all wear in the visible overflows
    Of spirit, such a look of careful pain!
  For God must love it better than repose.

  And all the people who went up to let
    Their hearts out to that Duke, as has been told--
  Where guess ye that the living people met,
    Kept tryst, formed ranks, chose leaders, first unrolled
  Their banners?
                  In the Loggia? where is set
    Cellini's godlike Perseus, bronze or gold,
  (How name the metal, when the statue flings
    Its soul so in your eyes?) with brow and sword
  Superbly calm, as all opposing things,
    Slain with the Gorgon, were no more abhorred
  Since ended?
                  No, the people sought no wings
    From Perseus in the Loggia, nor implored
  An inspiration in the place beside
    From that dim bust of Brutus, jagged and grand,
  Where Buonarroti passionately tried
    From out the close-clenched marble to demand
  The head of Rome's sublimest homicide,
    Then dropt the quivering mallet from his hand,
  Despairing he could find no model-stuff
    Of Brutus in all Florence where he found
  The gods and gladiators thick enough.
    Nor there! the people chose still holier ground:
  The people, who are simple, blind and rough,
    Know their own angels, after looking round.
  Whom chose they then? where met they?

                                  On the stone
    Called Dante's,--a plain flat stone scarce discerned
  From others in the pavement,--whereupon
    He used to bring his quiet chair out, turned
  To Brunelleschi's church, and pour alone
    The lava of his spirit when it burned:
  It is not cold to-day. O passionate
    Poor Dante who, a banished Florentine,
  Didst sit austere at banquets of the great
    And muse upon this far-off stone of thine
  And think how oft some passer used to wait
    A moment, in the golden day's decline,
  With "Good night, dearest Dante!"--well, good night!
    _I_ muse now, Dante, and think verily,
  Though chapelled in the byeway out of sight,
    Ravenna's bones would thrill with ecstasy,
  Couldst know thy favourite stone's elected right
    As tryst-place for thy Tuscans to foresee
  Their earliest chartas from. Good night, good morn,
    Henceforward, Dante! now my soul is sure
  That thine is better comforted of scorn,
    And looks down earthward in completer cure
  Than when, in Santa Croce church forlorn
    Of any corpse, the architect and hewer
  Did pile the empty marbles as thy tomb.[9]
    For now thou art no longer exiled, now
  Best honoured: we salute thee who art come
    Back to the old stone with a softer brow
  Than Giotto drew upon the wall, for some
    Good lovers of our age to track and plough[10]
  Their way to, through time's ordures stratified,
    And startle broad awake into the dull
  Bargello chamber: now thou'rt milder-eyed,--
    Now Beatrix may leap up glad to cull
  Thy first smile, even in heaven and at her side,
    Like that which, nine years old, looked beautiful
  At May-game. What do I say? I only meant
    That tender Dante loved his Florence well,
  While Florence, now, to love him is content;
    And, mark ye, that the piercingest sweet smell
  Of love's dear incense by the living sent
    To find the dead, is not accessible
  To lazy livers--no narcotic,--not
    Swung in a censer to a sleepy tune,--
  But trod out in the morning air by hot
    Quick spirits who tread firm to ends foreshown,
  And use the name of greatness unforgot,
    To meditate what greatness may be done.

  For Dante sits in heaven and ye stand here,
    And more remains for doing, all must feel,
  Than trysting on his stone from year to year
    To shift processions, civic toe to heel,
  The town's thanks to the Pitti. Are ye freer
    For what was felt that day? a chariot-wheel
  May spin fast, yet the chariot never roll.
    But if that day suggested something good,
  And bettered, with one purpose, soul by soul,--
    Better means freer. A land's brotherhood
  Is most puissant: men, upon the whole,
    Are what they can be,--nations, what they would.

  Will therefore, to be strong, thou Italy!
    Will to be noble! Austrian Metternich
  Can fix no yoke unless the neck agree;
    And thine is like the lion's when the thick
  Dews shudder from it, and no man would be
    The stroker of his mane, much less would prick
  His nostril with a reed. When nations roar
    Like lions, who shall tame them and defraud
  Of the due pasture by the river-shore?
    Roar, therefore! shake your dewlaps dry abroad:
  The amphitheatre with open door
    Leads back upon the benches who applaud
  The last spear-thruster.

                            Yet the Heavens forbid
    That we should call on passion to confront
  The brutal with the brutal and, amid
    This ripening world, suggest a lion-hunt
  And lion's-vengeance for the wrongs men did
    And do now, though the spears are getting blunt.
  We only call, because the sight and proof
    Of lion-strength hurts nothing; and to show
  A lion-heart, and measure paw with hoof,
    Helps something, even, and will instruct a foe
  As well as the onslaught, how to stand aloof:
    Or else the world gets past the mere brute blow
  Or given or taken. Children use the fist
    Until they are of age to use the brain;
  And so we needed Caesars to assist
    Man's justice, and Napoleons to explain
  God's counsel, when a point was nearly missed,
    Until our generations should attain
  Christ's stature nearer. Not that we, alas,
    Attain already; but a single inch
  Will raise to look down on the swordsman's pass.
    As knightly Roland on the coward's flinch:
  And, after chloroform and ether-gas,
    We find out slowly what the bee and finch
  Have ready found, through Nature's lamp in each,
    How to our races we may justify
  Our individual claims and, as we reach
    Our own grapes, bend the top vines to supply
  The children's uses,--how to fill a breach
    With olive-branches,--how to quench a lie
  With truth, and smite a foe upon the cheek
    With Christ's most conquering kiss. Why, these are things
  Worth a great nation's finding, to prove weak
    The "glorious arms" of military kings.
  And so with wide embrace, my England, seek
    To stifle the bad heat and flickerings
  Of this world's false and nearly expended fire!
    Draw palpitating arrows to the wood,
  And twang abroad thy high hopes and thy higher
    Resolves, from that most virtuous altitude!
  Till nations shall unconsciously aspire
    By looking up to thee, and learn that good
  And glory are not different. Announce law
    By freedom; exalt chivalry by peace;
  Instruct how clear calm eyes can overawe,
    And how pure hands, stretched simply to release
  A bond-slave, will not need a sword to draw
    To be held dreadful. O my England, crease
  Thy purple with no alien agonies,
    No struggles toward encroachment, no vile war!
  Disband thy captains, change thy victories,
    Be henceforth prosperous as the angels are,
  Helping, not humbling.

                            Drums and battle-cries
    Go out in music of the morning-star--
  And soon we shall have thinkers in the place
    Of fighters, each found able as a man
  To strike electric influence through a race,
    Unstayed by city-wall and barbican.
  The poet shall look grander in the face
    Than even of old (when he of Greece began
  To sing "that Achillean wrath which slew
    So many heroes")--seeing he shall treat
  The deeds of souls heroic toward the true,
    The oracles of life, previsions sweet
  And awful like divine swans gliding through
    White arms of Ledas, which will leave the heat
  Of their escaping godship to endue
    The human medium with a heavenly flush.

  Meanwhile, in this same Italy we want
    Not popular passion, to arise and crush,
  But popular conscience, which may covenant
    For what it knows. Concede without a blush,
  To grant the "civic guard" is not to grant
    The civic spirit, living and awake:
  Those lappets on your shoulders, citizens,
    Your eyes strain after sideways till they ache
  (While still, in admirations and amens,
    The crowd comes up on festa-days to take
  The great sight in)--are not intelligence,
    Not courage even--alas, if not the sign
  Of something very noble, they are nought;
    For every day ye dress your sallow kine
  With fringes down their cheeks, though unbesought
    They loll their heavy heads and drag the wine
  And bear the wooden yoke as they were taught
    The first day. What ye want is light--indeed
  Not sunlight--(ye may well look up surprised
    To those unfathomable heavens that feed
  Your purple hills)--but God's light organized
    In some high soul, crowned capable to lead
  The conscious people, conscious and advised,--
    For if we lift a people like mere clay,
  It falls the same. We want thee, O unfound
    And sovran teacher! if thy beard be grey
  Or black, we bid thee rise up from the ground
    And speak the word God giveth thee to say,
  Inspiring into all this people round,
    Instead of passion, thought, which pioneers
  All generous passion, purifies from sin,
    And strikes the hour for. Rise up, teacher! here's
  A crowd to make a nation!--best begin
    By making each a man, till all be peers
  Of earth's true patriots and pure martyrs in
    Knowing and daring. Best unbar the doors
  Which Peter's heirs keep locked so overclose
    They only let the mice across the floors,
  While every churchman dangles, as he goes,
    The great key at his girdle, and abhors
  In Christ's name, meekly. Open wide the house,
    Concede the entrance with Christ's liberal mind,
  And set the tables with His wine and bread.
    What! "commune in both kinds?" In every kind--
  Wine, wafer, love, hope, truth, unlimited,
    Nothing kept back. For when a man is blind
  To starlight, will he see the rose is red?
    A bondsman shivering at a Jesuit's foot--
  "Vae! mea culpa!"--is not like to stand
    A freedman at a despot's and dispute
  His titles by the balance in his hand,
    Weighing them "suo jure." Tend the root
  If careful of the branches, and expand
    The inner souls of men before you strive
  For civic heroes.

                        But the teacher, where?
    From all these crowded faces, all alive,
  Eyes, of their own lids flashing themselves bare,
    And brows that with a mobile life contrive
  A deeper shadow,--may we in no wise dare
    To put a finger out and touch a man,
  And cry "this is the leader"? What, all these!
    Broad heads, black eyes,--yet not a soul that ran
  From God down with a message? All, to please
    The donna waving measures with her fan,
  And not the judgment-angel on his knees
    (The trumpet just an inch off from his lips),
  Who when he breathes next, will put out the sun?

    Yet mankind's self were foundered in eclipse,
  If lacking doers, with great works to be done;
    And lo, the startled earth already dips
  Back into light; a better day's begun;
    And soon this leader, teacher, will stand plain,
  And build the golden pipes and synthesize
    This people-organ for a holy strain.
  We hold this hope, and still in all these eyes
    Go sounding for the deep look which shall drain
  Suffused thought into channelled enterprise.
    Where is the teacher? What now may he do,
  Who shall do greatly? Doth he gird his waist
    With a monk's rope, like Luther? or pursue
  The goat, like Tell? or dry his nets in haste,
    Like Masaniello when the sky was blue?
  Keep house, like other peasants, with inlaced
    Bare brawny arms about a favourite child,
  And meditative looks beyond the door
    (But not to mark the kidling's teeth have filed
  The green shoots of his vine which last year bore
    Full twenty bunches), or, on triple-piled
  Throne-velvets sit at ease to bless the poor,
    Like other pontiffs, in the Poorest's name?
  The old tiara keeps itself aslope
    Upon his steady brows which, all the same,
  Bend mildly to permit the people's hope?

    Whatever hand shall grasp this oriflamme,
  Whatever man (last peasant or first pope
    Seeking to free his country) shall appear,
  Teach, lead, strike fire into the masses, fill
    These empty bladders with fine air, insphere
  These wills into a unity of will,
    And make of Italy a nation--dear
  And blessed be that man! the Heavens shall kill
    No leaf the earth lets grow for him, and Death
  Shall cast him back upon the lap of Life
    To live more surely, in a clarion-breath
  Of hero-music. Brutus with the knife,
    Rienzi with the fasces, throb beneath
  Rome's stones,--and more who threw away joy's fife
    Like Pallas, that the beauty of their souls
  Might ever shine untroubled and entire:
    But if it can be true that he who rolls
  The Church's thunders will reserve her fire
    For only light,--from eucharistic bowls
  Will pour new life for nations that expire,
    And rend the scarlet of his papal vest
  To gird the weak loins of his countrymen,--
    I hold that he surpasses all the rest
  Of Romans, heroes, patriots; and that when
    He sat down on the throne, he dispossessed
  The first graves of some glory. See again,
    This country-saving is a glorious thing:
  And if a common man achieved it? well.
    Say, a rich man did? excellent. A king?
  That grows sublime. A priest? improbable.
    A pope? Ah, there we stop, and cannot bring
  Our faith up to the leap, with history's bell
    So heavy round the neck of it--albeit
  We fain would grant the possibility
    For _thy_ sake, Pio Nono!

                                    Stretch thy feet
  In that case--I will kiss them reverently
    As any pilgrim to the papal seat:
  And, such proved possible, thy throne to me
    Shall seem as holy a place as Pellico's
  Venetian dungeon, or as Spielberg's grate
    At which the Lombard woman hung the rose
  Of her sweet soul by its own dewy weight,
    To feel the dungeon round her sunshine close,
  And pining so, died early, yet too late
    For what she suffered. Yea, I will not choose
  Betwixt thy throne, Pope Pius, and the spot
    Marked red for ever, spite of rains and dews,
  Where Two fell riddled by the Austrian's shot,
    The brothers Bandiera, who accuse,
  With one same mother-voice and face (that what
    They speak may be invincible) the sins
  Of earth's tormentors before God the just,
    Until the unconscious thunderbolt begins
  To loosen in His grasp.

                            And yet we must
    Beware, and mark the natural kiths and kins
  Of circumstance and office, and distrust
    The rich man reasoning in a poor man's hut,
  The poet who neglects pure truth to prove
    Statistic fact, the child who leaves a rut
  For a smoother road, the priest who vows his glove
    Exhales no grace, the prince who walks afoot,
  The woman who has sworn she will not love,
    And this Ninth Pius in Seventh Gregory's chair,
  With Andrea Doria's forehead!

                                Count what goes
    To making up a pope, before he wear
  That triple crown. We pass the world-wide throes
    Which went to make the popedom,--the despair
  Of free men, good men, wise men; the dread shows
    Of women's faces, by the faggot's flash
  Tossed out, to the minutest stir and throb
    O' the white lips, the least tremble of a lash,
  To glut the red stare of a licensed mob;
    The short mad cries down oubliettes, and plash
  So horribly far off; priests, trained to rob,
    And kings that, like encouraged nightmares, sat
  On nations' hearts most heavily distressed
    With monstrous sights and apophthegms of fate--
  We pass these things,--because "the times" are prest
    With necessary charges of the weight
  Of all this sin, and "Calvin, for the rest,
    Made bold to burn Servetus. Ah, men err!"--
  And so do _churches_! which is all we mean
    To bring to proof in any register
  Of theological fat kine and lean:
    So drive them back into the pens! refer
  Old sins (with pourpoint, "quotha" and "I ween")
    Entirely to the old times, the old times;
  Nor ever ask why this preponderant
    Infallible pure Church could set her chimes
  Most loudly then, just then,--most jubilant,
    Precisely then, when mankind stood in crimes
  Full heart-deep, and Heaven's judgments were not scant.
    Inquire still less, what signifies a church
  Of perfect inspiration and pure laws
    Who burns the first man with a brimstone-torch,
  And grinds the second, bone by bone, because
    The times, forsooth, are used to rack and scorch!
  What _is_ a holy Church unless she awes
    The times down from their sins? Did Christ select
  Such amiable times to come and teach
    Love to, and mercy? The whole world were wrecked
  If every mere great man, who lives to reach
    A little leaf of popular respect,
  Attained not simply by some special breach
    In the age's customs, by some precedence
  In thought and act, which, having proved him higher
    Than those he lived with, proved his competence
  In helping them to wonder and aspire.

    My words are guiltless of the bigot's sense;
  My soul has fire to mingle with the fire
    Of all these souls, within or out of doors
  Of Rome's church or another. I believe
    In one Priest, and one temple with its floors
  Of shining jasper gloom'd at morn and eve
    By countless knees of earnest auditors,
  And crystal walls too lucid to perceive,
    That none may take the measure of the place
  And say "So far the porphyry, then, the flint--
    To this mark mercy goes, and there ends grace,"
  Though still the permeable crystals hint
    At some white starry distance, bathed in space.
  I feel how nature's ice-crusts keep the dint
    Of undersprings of silent Deity.
  I hold the articulated gospels which
    Show Christ among us crucified on tree.
  I love all who love truth, if poor or rich
    In what they have won of truth possessively.
  No altars and no hands defiled with pitch
    Shall scare me off, but I will pray and eat
  With all these--taking leave to choose my ewers--
    And say at last "Your visible churches cheat
  Their inward types; and, if a church assures
    Of standing without failure and defeat,
  The same both fails and lies."

                                  To leave which lures
    Of wider subject through past years,--behold,
  We come back from the popedom to the pope,
    To ponder what he _must_ be, ere we are bold
  For what he _may_ be, with our heavy hope
    To trust upon his soul. So, fold by fold,
  Explore this mummy in the priestly cope,
    Transmitted through the darks of time, to catch
  The man within the wrappage, and discern
    How he, an honest man, upon the watch
  Full fifty years for what a man may learn,
    Contrived to get just there; with what a snatch
  Of old-world oboli he had to earn
    The passage through; with what a drowsy sop,
  To drench the busy barkings of his brain;
    What ghosts of pale tradition, wreathed with hop
  'Gainst wakeful thought, he had to entertain
    For heavenly visions; and consent to stop
  The clock at noon, and let the hour remain
    (Without vain windings-up) inviolate
  Against all chimings from the belfry. Lo,
    From every given pope you must abate,
  Albeit you love him, some things--good, you know--
    Which every given heretic you hate,
  Assumes for his, as being plainly so.
    A pope must hold by popes a little,--yes,
  By councils, from Nicaea up to Trent,--
    By hierocratic empire, more or less
  Irresponsible to men,--he must resent
    Each man's particular conscience, and repress
  Inquiry, meditation, argument,
    As tyrants faction. Also, he must not
  Love truth too dangerously, but prefer
    "The interests of the Church" (because a blot
  Is better than a rent, in miniver)--
    Submit to see the people swallow hot
  Husk-porridge, which his chartered churchmen stir
    Quoting the only true God's epigraph,
  "Feed my lambs, Peter!"--must consent to sit
    Attesting with his pastoral ring and staff
  To such a picture of our Lady, hit
    Off well by artist-angels (though not half
  As fair as Giotto would have painted it)--
    To such a vial, where a dead man's blood
  Runs yearly warm beneath a churchman's finger,--
    To such a holy house of stone and wood,
  Whereof a cloud of angels was the bringer
    From Bethlehem to Loreto. Were it good
  For any pope on earth to be a flinger
    Of stones against these high-niched counterfeits?
  Apostates only are iconoclasts.
    He dares not say, while this false thing abets
  That true thing, "This is false." He keeps his fasts
    And prayers, as prayer and fast were silver frets
  To change a note upon a string that lasts,
    And make a lie a virtue. Now, if he
  Did more than this, higher hoped, and braver dared,
    I think he were a pope in jeopardy,
  Or no pope rather, for his truth had barred
    The vaulting of his life,--and certainly,
  If he do only this, mankind's regard
    Moves on from him at once, to seek some new
  Teacher and leader. He is good and great
    According to the deeds a pope can do;
  Most liberal, save those bonds; affectionate,
    As princes may be, and, as priests are, true;
  But only the Ninth Pius after eight,
    When all's praised most. At best and hopefullest,
  He's pope--we want a man! his heart beats warm,
    But, like the prince enchanted to the waist,
  He sits in stone and hardens by a charm
    Into the marble of his throne high-placed.
  Mild benediction waves his saintly arm--
    So, good! but what we want's a perfect man,
  Complete and all alive: half travertine
    Half suits our need, and ill subserves our plan.
  Feet, knees, nerves, sinews, energies divine
    Were never yet too much for men who ran
  In such hard ways as must be this of thine,
    Deliverer whom we seek, whoe'er thou art,
  Pope, prince, or peasant! If, indeed, the first,
    The noblest, therefore! since the heroic heart
  Within thee must be great enough to burst
    Those trammels buckling to the baser part
  Thy saintly peers in Rome, who crossed and cursed
    With the same finger.

                            Come, appear, be found,
  If pope or peasant, come! we hear the cock,
    The courtier of the mountains when first crowned
  With golden dawn; and orient glories flock
    To meet the sun upon the highest ground.
  Take voice and work! we wait to hear thee knock
    At some one of our Florentine nine gates,
  On each of which was imaged a sublime
    Face of a Tuscan genius, which, for hate's
  And love's sake, both, our Florence in her prime
    Turned boldly on all comers to her states,
  As heroes turned their shields in antique time
    Emblazoned with honourable acts. And though
  The gates are blank now of such images,
    And Petrarch looks no more from Nicolo
  Toward dear Arezzo, 'twixt the acacia-trees,
    Nor Dante, from gate Gallo--still we know,
  Despite the razing of the blazonries,
    Remains the consecration of the shield:
  The dead heroic faces will start out
    On all these gates, if foes should take the field,
  And blend sublimely, at the earliest shout,
    With living heroes who will scorn to yield
  A hair's-breadth even, when, gazing round about,
    They find in what a glorious company
  They fight the foes of Florence. Who will grudge
    His one poor life, when that great man we see
  Has given five hundred years, the world being judge,
    To help the glory of his Italy?
  Who, born the fair side of the Alps, will budge,
    When Dante stays, when Ariosto stays,
  When Petrarch stays for ever? Ye bring swords,
    My Tuscans? Ay, if wanted in this haze,
  Bring swords: but first bring souls!--bring thoughts and words,
    Unrusted by a tear of yesterday's,
  Yet awful by its wrong,--and cut these cords,
    And mow this green lush falseness to the roots,
  And shut the mouth of hell below the swathe!
    And, if ye can bring songs too, let the lute's
  Recoverable music softly bathe
    Some poet's hand, that, through all bursts and bruits
  Of popular passion, all unripe and rathe
    Convictions of the popular intellect,
  Ye may not lack a finger up the air,
    Annunciative, reproving, pure, erect,
  To show which way your first Ideal bare
    The whiteness of its wings when (sorely pecked
  By falcons on your wrists) it unaware
    Arose up overhead and out of sight.

  Meanwhile, let all the far ends of the world
    Breathe back the deep breath of their old delight,
  To swell the Italian banner just unfurled.
    Help, lands of Europe! for, if Austria fight,
  The drums will bar your slumber. Had ye curled
    The laurel for your thousand artists' brows,
  If these Italian hands had planted none?
    Can any sit down idle in the house
  Nor hear appeals from Buonarroti's stone
    And Raffael's canvas, rousing and to rouse?
  Where's Poussin's master? Gallic Avignon
    Bred Laura, and Vaucluse's fount has stirred
  The heart of France too strongly, as it lets
    Its little stream out (like a wizard's bird
  Which bounds upon its emerald wing and wets
    The rocks on each side), that she should not gird
  Her loins with Charlemagne's sword when foes beset
    The country of her Petrarch. Spain may well
  Be minded how from Italy she caught,
    To mingle with her tinkling Moorish bell,
  A fuller cadence and a subtler thought.
    And even the New World, the receptacle
  Of freemen, may send glad men, as it ought,
    To greet Vespucci Amerigo's door.
  While England claims, by trump of poetry,
    Verona, Venice, the Ravenna-shore,
  And dearer holds John Milton's Fiesole
    Than Langland's Malvern with the stars in flower.

  And Vallombrosa, we two went to see
    Last June, beloved companion,--where sublime
  The mountains live in holy families,
    And the slow pinewoods ever climb and climb
  Half up their breasts, just stagger as they seize
    Some grey crag, drop back with it many a time,
  And straggle blindly down the precipice.
    The Vallombrosan brooks were strewn as thick
  That June-day, knee-deep with dead beechen leaves,
    As Milton saw them ere his heart grew sick
  And his eyes blind. I think the monks and beeves
    Are all the same too: scarce have they changed the wick
  On good Saint Gualbert's altar which receives
    The convent's pilgrims; and the pool in front
  (Wherein the hill-stream trout are cast, to wait
    The beatific vision and the grunt
  Used at refectory) keeps its weedy state,
    To baffle saintly abbots who would count
  The fish across their breviary nor 'bate
    The measure of their steps. O waterfalls
  And forests! sound and silence! mountains bare
    That leap up peak by peak and catch the palls
  Of purple and silver mist to rend and share
    With one another, at electric calls
  Of life in the sunbeams,--till we cannot dare
    Fix your shapes, count your number! we must think
  Your beauty and your glory helped to fill
    The cup of Milton's soul so to the brink,
  He never more was thirsty when God's will
    Had shattered to his sense the last chain-link
  By which he had drawn from Nature's visible
    The fresh well-water. Satisfied by this,
  He sang of Adam's paradise and smiled,
    Remembering Vallombrosa. Therefore is
  The place divine to English man and child,
    And pilgrims leave their souls here in a kiss.

  For Italy's the whole earth's treasury, piled
    With reveries of gentle ladies, flung
  Aside, like ravelled silk, from life's worn stuff;
    With coins of scholars' fancy, which, being rung
  On work-day counter, still sound silver-proof;
    In short, with all the dreams of dreamers young,
  Before their heads have time for slipping off
    Hope's pillow to the ground. How oft, indeed,
  We've sent our souls out from the rigid north,
    On bare white feet which would not print nor bleed,
  To climb the Alpine passes and look forth,
    Where booming low the Lombard rivers lead
  To gardens, vineyards, all a dream is worth,--
    Sights, thou and I, Love, have seen afterward
  From Tuscan Bellosguardo, wide awake,[11]
    When, standing on the actual blessed sward
  Where Galileo stood at nights to take
    The vision of the stars, we have found it hard,
  Gazing upon the earth and heaven, to make
    A choice of beauty.

                        Therefore let us all
  Refreshed in England or in other land,
    By visions, with their fountain-rise and fall,
  Of this earth's darling,--we, who understand
    A little how the Tuscan musical
  Vowels do round themselves as if they planned
    Eternities of separate sweetness,--we,
  Who loved Sorrento vines in picture-book,
    Or ere in wine-cup we pledged faith or glee,--
  Who loved Rome's wolf with demi-gods at suck,
    Or ere we loved truth's own divinity,--
  Who loved, in brief, the classic hill and brook,
    And Ovid's dreaming tales and Petrarch's song,
  Or ere we loved Love's self even,--let us give
    The blessing of our souls (and wish them strong
  To bear it to the height where prayers arrive,
    When faithful spirits pray against a wrong,)
  To this great cause of southern men who strive
    In God's name for man's rights, and shall not fail.

  Behold, they shall not fail. The shouts ascend
    Above the shrieks, in Naples, and prevail.
  Rows of shot corpses, waiting for the end
    Of burial, seem to smile up straight and pale
  Into the azure air and apprehend
    That final gun-flash from Palermo's coast
  Which lightens their apocalypse of death.
    So let them die! The world shows nothing lost;
  Therefore, not blood. Above or underneath,
    What matter, brothers, if ye keep your post
  On duty's side? As sword returns to sheath,
    So dust to grave, but souls find place in Heaven.
  Heroic daring is the true success,
    The eucharistic bread requires no leaven;
  And though your ends were hopeless, we should bless
    Your cause as holy. Strive--and, having striven,
  Take, for God's recompense, that righteousness!


FOOTNOTES:

   [2] They show at Verona, as the tomb of Juliet, an empty trough of
       stone.

   [3] These famous statues recline in the Sagrestia Nuova, on the tombs
       of Giuliano de' Medici, third son of Lorenzo the Magnificent,
       and Lorenzo of Urbino, his grandson. Strozzi's epigram on the
       Night, with Michel Angelo's rejoinder, is well known.

   [4] This mocking task was set by Pietro, the unworthy successor of
       Lorenzo the Magnificent.

   [5] Savonarola was burnt for his testimony against papal corruptions
       as early as March, 1498: and, as late as our own day, it has
       been a custom in Florence to strew with violets the pavement
       where he suffered, in grateful recognition of the anniversary.

   [6] See his description of the plague in Florence.

   [7] Charles of Anjou, in his passage through Florence, was permitted
       to see this picture while yet in Cimabue's "bottega." The
       populace followed the royal visitor, and, from the universal
       delight and admiration, the quarter of the city in which the
       artist lived was called "Borgo Allegri." The picture was
       carried in triumph to the church, and deposited there.

   [8] How Cimabue found Giotto, the shepherd-boy, sketching a ram of
       his flock upon a stone, is prettily told by Vasari,--who also
       relates that the elder artist Margheritone died "infastidito"
       of the successes of the new school.

   [9] The Florentines, to whom the Ravennese refused the body of Dante
       (demanded of them "in a late remorse of love"), have given a
       cenotaph in this church to their divine poet. Something less
       than a grave!

  [10] In allusion to Mr. Kirkup's discovery of Giotto's fresco portrait
       of Dante.

  [11] Galileo's villa, close to Florence, is built on an eminence
       called Bellosguardo.


PART II.

  I wrote a meditation and a dream,
    Hearing a little child sing in the street:
  I leant upon his music as a theme,
    Till it gave way beneath my heart's full beat
  Which tried at an exultant prophecy
    But dropped before the measure was complete--
  Alas, for songs and hearts! O Tuscany,
    O Dante's Florence, is the type too plain?
  Didst thou, too, only sing of liberty
    As little children take up a high strain
  With unintentioned voices, and break off
    To sleep upon their mothers' knees again?
  Couldst thou not watch one hour? then, sleep enough--
    That sleep may hasten manhood and sustain
  The faint pale spirit with some muscular stuff.

    But we, who cannot slumber as thou dost,
  We thinkers, who have thought for thee and failed,
    We hopers, who have hoped for thee and lost,
  We poets, wandered round by dreams,[12] who hailed
    From this Atrides' roof (with lintel-post
  Which still drips blood,--the worse part hath prevailed)
    The fire-voice of the beacons to declare
  Troy taken, sorrow ended,--cozened through
    A crimson sunset in a misty air,
  What now remains for such as we, to do?
    God's judgments, peradventure, will He bare
  To the roots of thunder, if we kneel and sue?

    From Casa Guidi windows I looked forth,
  And saw ten thousand eyes of Florentines
    Flash back the triumph of the Lombard north,--
  Saw fifty banners, freighted with the signs
    And exultations of the awakened earth,
  Float on above the multitude in lines,
    Straight to the Pitti. So, the vision went.
  And so, between those populous rough hands
    Raised in the sun, Duke Leopold outleant,
  And took the patriot's oath which henceforth stands
    Among the oaths of perjurers, eminent
  To catch the lightnings ripened for these lands.

    Why swear at all, thou false Duke Leopold?
  What need to swear? What need to boast thy blood
    Unspoilt of Austria, and thy heart unsold
  Away from Florence? It was understood
    God made thee not too vigorous or too bold;
  And men had patience with thy quiet mood,
    And women, pity, as they saw thee pace
  Their festive streets with premature grey hairs.
    We turned the mild dejection of thy face
  To princely meanings, took thy wrinkling cares
    For ruffling hopes, and called thee weak, not base.
  Nay, better light the torches for more prayers
    And smoke the pale Madonnas at the shrine,
  Being still "our poor Grand-duke, our good Grand-duke,
    Who cannot help the Austrian in his line,"--
  Than write an oath upon a nation's book
    For men to spit at with scorn's blurring brine!
  Who dares forgive what none can overlook?

    For me, I do repent me in this dust
  Of towns and temples which makes Italy,--
    I sigh amid the sighs which breathe a gust
  Of dying century to century
    Around us on the uneven crater-crust
  Of these old worlds,--I bow my soul and knee.
    Absolve me, patriots, of my woman's fault
  That ever I believed the man was true!
    These sceptred strangers shun the common salt,
  And, therefore, when the general board's in view
    And they stand up to carve for blind and halt,
  The wise suspect the viands which ensue.
    I much repent that, in this time and place
  Where many corpse-lights of experience burn
    From Caesar's and Lorenzo's festering race,
  To enlighten groping reasoners, I could learn
    No better counsel for a simple case
  Than to put faith in princes, in my turn.
    Had all the death-piles of the ancient years
  Flared up in vain before me? knew I not
    What stench arises from some purple gears?
  And how the sceptres witness whence they got
    Their briar-wood, crackling through the atmosphere's
  Foul smoke, by princely perjuries, kept hot?
    Forgive me, ghosts of patriots,--Brutus, thou,
  Who trailest downhill into life again
    Thy blood-weighed cloak, to indict me with thy slow
  Reproachful eyes!--for being taught in vain
    That, while the illegitimate Caesars show
  Of meaner stature than the first full strain
    (Confessed incompetent to conquer Gaul),
  They swoon as feebly and cross Rubicons
    As rashly as any Julius of them all!
  Forgive, that I forgot the mind which runs
    Through absolute races, too unsceptical!
  I saw the man among his little sons,
    His lips were warm with kisses while he swore;
  And I, because I am a woman--I,
    Who felt my own child's coming life before
  The prescience of my soul, and held faith high,--
    I could not bear to think, whoever bore,
  That lips, so warmed, could shape so cold a lie.

    From Casa Guidi windows I looked out,
  Again looked, and beheld a different sight.
    The Duke had fled before the people's shout
  "Long live the Duke!" A people, to speak right,
    Must speak as soft as courtiers, lest a doubt
  Should curdle brows of gracious sovereigns, white.
    Moreover that same dangerous shouting meant
  Some gratitude for future favours, which
    Were only promised, the Constituent
  Implied, the whole being subject to the hitch
    In "motu proprios," very incident
  To all these Czars, from Paul to Paulovitch.
    Whereat the people rose up in the dust
  Of the ruler's flying feet, and shouted still
    And loudly; only, this time, as was just,
  Not "Live the Duke," who had fled for good or ill,
    But "Live the People," who remained and must,
  The unrenounced and unrenounceable.
    Long live the people! How they lived! and boiled
  And bubbled in the cauldron of the street:
    How the young blustered, nor the old recoiled,
  And what a thunderous stir of tongues and feet
    Trod flat the palpitating bells and foiled
  The joy-guns of their echo, shattering it!
    How down they pulled the Duke's arms everywhere!
  How up they set new cafe-signs, to show
    Where patriots might sip ices in pure air--
  (The fresh paint smelling somewhat)! To and fro
    How marched the civic guard, and stopped to stare
  When boys broke windows in a civic glow!
    How rebel songs were sung to loyal tunes,
  And bishops cursed in ecclesiastic metres:
    How all the Circoli grew large as moons,
  And all the speakers, moonstruck,--thankful greeters
    Of prospects which struck poor the ducal boons,
  A mere free Press, and Chambers!--frank repeaters
    Of great Guerazzi's praises--"There's a man,
  The father of the land, who, truly great,
    Takes off that national disgrace and ban,
  The farthing tax upon our Florence-gate,
    And saves Italia as he only can!"
  How all the nobles fled, and would not wait,
    Because they were most noble,--which being so,
  How Liberals vowed to burn their palaces,
    Because free Tuscans were not free to go!
  How grown men raged at Austria's wickedness,
    And smoked,--while fifty striplings in a row
  Marched straight to Piedmont for the wrong's redress!
    You say we failed in duty, we who wore
  Black velvet like Italian democrats,
    Who slashed our sleeves like patriots, nor forswore
  The true republic in the form of hats?
    We chased the archbishop from the Duomo door,
  We chalked the walls with bloody caveats
    Against all tyrants. If we did not fight
  Exactly, we fired muskets up the air
    To show that victory was ours of right.
  We met, had free discussion everywhere
    (Except perhaps i' the Chambers) day and night.
  We proved the poor should be employed, ... that's fair,--
    And yet the rich not worked for anywise,--
  Pay certified, yet payers abrogated,--
    Full work secured, yet liabilities
  To overwork excluded,--not one bated
    Of all our holidays, that still, at twice
  Or thrice a week, are moderately rated.
    We proved that Austria was dislodged, or would
  Or should be, and that Tuscany in arms
    Should, would dislodge her, ending the old feud;
  And yet, to leave our piazzas, shops, and farms,
    For the simple sake of fighting, was not good--
  We proved that also. "Did we carry charms
    Against being killed ourselves, that we should rush
  On killing others? what, desert herewith
    Our wives and mothers?--was that duty? tush!"
  At which we shook the sword within the sheath
    Like heroes--only louder; and the flush
  Ran up the cheek to meet the future wreath.
    Nay, what we proved, we shouted--how we shouted
  (Especially the boys did), boldly planting
    That tree of liberty, whose fruit is doubted,
  Because the roots are not of nature's granting!
    A tree of good and evil: none, without it,
  Grow gods; alas and, with it, men are wanting!

    O holy knowledge, holy liberty,
  O holy rights of nations! If I speak
    These bitter things against the jugglery
  Of days that in your names proved blind and weak,
    It is that tears are bitter. When we see
  The brown skulls grin at death in churchyards bleak,
    We do not cry "This Yorick is too light,"
  For death grows deathlier with that mouth he makes.
    So with my mocking: bitter things I write
  Because my soul is bitter for your sakes,
    O freedom! O my Florence!

                                Men who might
  Do greatly in a universe that breaks
    And burns, must ever _know_ before they do.
  Courage and patience are but sacrifice;
    And sacrifice is offered for and to
  Something conceived of. Each man pays a price
    For what himself counts precious, whether true
  Or false the appreciation it implies.
    But here,--no knowledge, no conception, nought!
  Desire was absent, that provides great deeds
    From out the greatness of prevenient thought:
  And action, action, like a flame that needs
    A steady breath and fuel, being caught
  Up, like a burning reed from other reeds,
    Flashed in the empty and uncertain air,
  Then wavered, then went out. Behold, who blames
    A crooked course, when not a goal is there
  To round the fervid striving of the games?
    An ignorance of means may minister
  To greatness, but an ignorance of aims
    Makes it impossible to be great at all.
  So with our Tuscans! Let none dare to say,
    "Here virtue never can be national;
  Here fortitude can never cut a way
    Between the Austrian muskets, out of thrall:"
  I tell you rather that, whoever may
    Discern true ends here, shall grow pure enough
  To love them, brave enough to strive for them,
    And strong to reach them though the roads be rough:
  That having learnt--by no mere apophthegm--
    Not just the draping of a graceful stuff
  About a statue, broidered at the hem,--
    Not just the trilling on an opera-stage
  Of "liberta" to bravos--(a fair word,
    Yet too allied to inarticulate rage
  And breathless sobs, for singing, though the chord
    Were deeper than they struck it) but the gauge
  Of civil wants sustained and wrongs abhorred,
    The serious sacred meaning and full use
  Of freedom for a nation,--then, indeed,
    Our Tuscans, underneath the bloody dews
  Of some new morning, rising up agreed
    And bold, will want no Saxon souls or thews
  To sweep their piazzas clear of Austria's breed.

    Alas, alas! it was not so this time.
  Conviction was not, courage failed, and truth
    Was something to be doubted of. The mime
  Changed masks, because a mime. The tide as smooth
    In running in as out, no sense of crime
  Because no sense of virtue,--sudden ruth
    Seized on the people: they would have again
  Their good Grand-duke and leave Guerazzi, though
    He took that tax from Florence. "Much in vain
  He takes it from the market-carts, we trow,
    While urgent that no market-men remain,
  But all march off and leave the spade and plough,
    To die among the Lombards. Was it thus
  The dear paternal Duke did? Live the Duke!"
    At which the joy-bells multitudinous,
  Swept by an opposite wind, as loudly shook.
    Call back the mild archbishop to his house,
  To bless the people with his frightened look,--
    He shall not yet be hanged, you comprehend!
  Seize on Guerazzi; guard him in full view,
    Or else we stab him in the back, to end!
  Rub out those chalked devices, set up new
    The Duke's arms, doff your Phrygian caps, and men
  The pavement of the piazzas broke into
    By barren poles of freedom: smooth the way
  For the ducal carriage, lest his highness sigh
    "Here trees of liberty grew yesterday!"
  "Long live the Duke!"--how roared the cannonry,
    How rocked the bell-towers, and through thickening spray
  Of nosegays, wreaths, and kerchiefs tossed on high,
    How marched the civic guard, the people still
  Being good at shouts, especially the boys!
    Alas, poor people, of an unfledged will
  Most fitly expressed by such a callow voice!
    Alas, still poorer Duke, incapable
  Of being worthy even of so much noise!

    You think he came back instantly, with thanks
  And tears in his faint eyes, and hands extended
    To stretch the franchise through their utmost ranks?
  That having, like a father, apprehended,
    He came to pardon fatherly those pranks
  Played out and now in filial service ended?--
    That some love-token, like a prince, he threw
  To meet the people's love-call, in return?
    Well, how he came I will relate to you;
  And if your hearts should burn, why, hearts _must_ burn,
    To make the ashes which things old and new
  Shall be washed clean in--as this Duke will learn.

    From Casa Guidi windows gazing, then,
  I saw and witness how the Duke came back.
    The regular tramp of horse and tread of men
  Did smite the silence like an anvil black
    And sparkless. With her wide eyes at full strain,
  Our Tuscan nurse exclaimed "Alack, alack,
    Signora! these shall be the Austrians." "Nay,
  Be still," I answered, "do not wake the child!"
    --For so, my two-months' baby sleeping lay
  In milky dreams upon the bed and smiled,
    And I thought "He shall sleep on, while he may,
  Through the world's baseness: not being yet defiled,
    Why should he be disturbed by what is done?"
  Then, gazing, I beheld the long-drawn street
    Live out, from end to end, full in the sun,
  With Austria's thousand; sword and bayonet,
    Horse, foot, artillery,--cannons rolling on
  Like blind slow storm-clouds gestant with the heat
    Of undeveloped lightnings, each bestrode
  By a single man, dust-white from head to heel,
    Indifferent as the dreadful thing he rode,
  Like a sculptured Fate serene and terrible.
    As some smooth river which has overflowed
  Will slow and silent down its current wheel
    A loosened forest, all the pines erect,
  So swept, in mute significance of storm,
    The marshalled thousands; not an eye deflect
  To left or right, to catch a novel form
    Of Florence city adorned by architect
  And carver, or of Beauties live and warm
    Scared at the casements,--all, straightforward eyes
  And faces, held as steadfast as their swords,
    And cognizant of acts, not imageries.
  The key, O Tuscans, too well fits the wards!
    Ye asked for mimes,--these bring you tragedies:
  For purple,--these shall wear it as your lords.
    Ye played like children,--die like innocents.
  Ye mimicked lightnings with a torch,--the crack
    Of the actual bolt, your pastime circumvents.
  Ye called up ghosts, believing they were slack
    To follow any voice from Gilboa's tents, ...
  Here's Samuel!--and, so, Grand-dukes come back!

    And yet, they are no prophets though they come:
  That awful mantle, they are drawing close,
    Shall be searched, one day, by the shafts of Doom
  Through double folds now hoodwinking the brows.
    Resuscitated monarchs disentomb
  Grave-reptiles with them, in their new life-throes.
    Let such beware. Behold, the people waits,
  Like God: as He, in His serene of might,
    So they, in their endurance of long straits.
  Ye stamp no nation out, though day and night
    Ye tread them with that absolute heel which grates
  And grinds them flat from all attempted height.
    You kill worms sooner with a garden-spade
  Than you kill peoples: peoples will not die;
    The tail curls stronger when you lop the head:
  They writhe at every wound and multiply
    And shudder into a heap of life that's made
  Thus vital from God's own vitality.
    'T is hard to shrivel back a day of God's
  Once fixed for judgment: 't is as hard to change
    The peoples, when they rise beneath their loads
  And heave them from their backs with violent wrench
    To crush the oppressor; for that judgment-rod's
  The measure of this popular revenge.

    Meanwhile, from Casa Guidi windows, we
  Beheld the armament of Austria flow
    Into the drowning heart of Tuscany:
  And yet none wept, none cursed, or, if 't was so,
    They wept and cursed in silence. Silently
  Our noisy Tuscans watched the invading foe;
    They had learnt silence. Pressed against the wall,
  And grouped upon the church-steps opposite,
    A few pale men and women stared at all.
  God knows what they were feeling, with their white
    Constrained faces, they, so prodigal
  Of cry and gesture when the world goes right,
    Or wrong indeed. But here was depth of wrong,
  And here, still water; they were silent here;
    And through that sentient silence, struck along
  That measured tramp from which it stood out clear,
    Distinct the sound and silence, like a gong
  At midnight, each by the other awfuller,--
    While every soldier in his cap displayed
  A leaf of olive. Dusty, bitter thing!
    Was such plucked at Novara, is it said?

  A cry is up in England, which doth ring
    The hollow world through, that for ends of trade
  And virtue and God's better worshipping,
    We henceforth should exalt the name of Peace
  And leave those rusty wars that eat the soul,--
    Besides their clippings at our golden fleece.
  I, too, have loved peace, and from bole to bole
    Of immemorial undeciduous trees
  Would write, as lovers use upon a scroll,
    The holy name of Peace and set it high
  Where none could pluck it down. On trees, I say,--
    Not upon gibbets!--With the greenery
  Of dewy branches and the flowery May,
    Sweet mediation betwixt earth and sky
  Providing, for the shepherd's holiday.
    Not upon gibbets! though the vulture leaves
  The bones to quiet, which he first picked bare.
    Not upon dungeons! though the wretch who grieves
  And groans within less stirs the outer air
    Than any little field-mouse stirs the sheaves.
  Not upon chain-bolts! though the slave's despair
    Has dulled his helpless miserable brain
  And left him blank beneath the freeman's whip
    To sing and laugh out idiocies of pain.
  Nor yet on starving homes! where many a lip
    Has sobbed itself asleep through curses vain.
  I love no peace which is not fellowship
    And which includes not mercy. I would have
  Rather the raking of the guns across
    The world, and shrieks against Heaven's architrave;
  Rather the struggle in the slippery fosse
    Of dying men and horses, and the wave
  Blood-bubbling.... Enough said!--by Christ's own cross,
    And by this faint heart of my womanhood,
  Such things are better than a Peace that sits
    Beside a hearth in self-commended mood,
  And takes no thought how wind and rain by fits
    Are howling out of doors against the good
  Of the poor wanderer. What! your peace admits
    Of outside anguish while it keeps at home?
  I loathe to take its name upon my tongue.
    'T is nowise peace: 't is treason, stiff with doom,--
  'T is gagged despair and inarticulate wrong,--
    Annihilated Poland, stifled Rome,
  Dazed Naples, Hungary fainting 'neath the thong,
    And Austria wearing a smooth olive-leaf
  On her brute forehead, while her hoofs outpress
    The life from these Italian souls, in brief.
  O Lord of Peace, who art Lord of Righteousness,
    Constrain the anguished worlds from sin and grief,
  Pierce them with conscience, purge them with redress,
    And give us peace which is no counterfeit!

  But wherefore should we look out any more
    From Casa Guidi windows? Shut them straight,
  And let us sit down by the folded door,
    And veil our saddened faces and, so, wait
  What next the judgment-heavens make ready for.
    I have grown too weary of these windows. Sights
  Come thick enough and clear enough in thought,
    Without the sunshine; souls have inner lights.
  And since the Grand-duke has come back and brought
    This army of the North which thus requites
  His filial South, we leave him to be taught.
    His South, too, has learnt something certainly,
  Whereof the practice will bring profit soon;
    And peradventure other eyes may see,
  From Casa Guidi windows, what is done
    Or undone. Whatsoever deeds they be,
  Pope Pius will be glorified in none.
    Record that gain, Mazzini!--it shall top
  Some heights of sorrow. Peter's rock, so named,
    Shall lure no vessel any more to drop
  Among the breakers. Peter's chair is shamed
    Like any vulgar throne the nations lop
  To pieces for their firewood unreclaimed,--
    And, when it burns too, we shall see as well
  In Italy as elsewhere. Let it burn.
    The cross, accounted still adorable,
  Is Christ's cross only!--if the thief's would earn
    Some stealthy genuflexions, we rebel;
  And here the impenitent thief's has had its turn,
    As God knows; and the people on their knees
  Scoff and toss back the crosiers stretched like yokes
    To press their heads down lower by degrees.
  So Italy, by means of these last strokes,
    Escapes the danger which preceded these,
  Of leaving captured hands in cloven oaks,--
    Of leaving very souls within the buckle
  Whence bodies struggled outward,--of supposing
    That freemen may like bondsmen kneel and truckle,
  And then stand up as usual, without losing
    An inch of stature.
                        Those whom she-wolves suckle
  Will bite as wolves do in the grapple-closing
    Of adverse interests. This at last is known
  (Thank Pius for the lesson), that albeit
    Among the popedom's hundred heads of stone
  Which blink down on you from the roof's retreat
    In Siena's tiger-striped cathedral, Joan
  And Borgia 'mid their fellows you may greet,
    A harlot and a devil,--you will see
  Not a man, still less angel, grandly set
    With open soul to render man more free.
  The fishers are still thinking of the net,
    And, if not thinking of the hook too, we
  Are counted somewhat deeply in their debt;
    But that's a rare case--so, by hook and crook
  They take the advantage, agonizing Christ
    By rustier nails than those of Cedron's brook,
  I' the people's body very cheaply priced,--
    And quote high priesthood out of Holy book,
  While buying death-fields with the sacrificed.

    Priests, priests,--there's no such name!--God's own, except
  Ye take most vainly. Through heaven's lifted gate
    The priestly ephod in sole glory swept
  When Christ ascended, entered in, and sate
    (With victor face sublimely overwept)
  At Deity's right hand, to mediate,
    He alone, He for ever. On His breast
  The Urim and the Thummim, fed with fire
    From the full Godhead, flicker with the unrest
  Of human pitiful heart-beats. Come up higher,
    All Christians! Levi's tribe is dispossest.
  That solitary alb ye shall admire,
    But not cast lots for. The last chrism, poured right,
  Was on that Head, and poured for burial
    And not for domination in men's sight.
  What _are_ these churches? The old temple-wall
    Doth overlook them juggling with the sleight
  Of surplice, candlestick and altar-pall;
    East church and west church, ay, north church and south,
  Rome's church and England's,--let them all repent,
    And make concordats 'twixt their soul and mouth,
  Succeed Saint Paul by working at the tent,
    Become infallible guides by speaking truth,
  And excommunicate their pride that bent
    And cramped the souls of men.
                                  Why, even here
  Priestcraft burns out, the twined linen blazes;
    Not, like asbestos, to grow white and clear,
  But all to perish!--while the fire-smell raises
    To life some swooning spirits who, last year,
  Lost breath and heart in these church-stifled places.
    Why, almost, through this Pius, we believed
  The priesthood could be an honest thing, he smiled
    So saintly while our corn was being sheaved
  For his own granaries! Showing now defiled
    His hireling hands, a better help's achieved
  Than if they blessed us shepherd-like and mild.
    False doctrine, strangled by its own amen,
  Dies in the throat of all this nation. Who
    Will speak a pope's name as they rise again?
  What woman or what child will count him true?
    What dreamer praise him with the voice or pen?
  What man fight for him?--Pius takes his due.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Record that gain, Mazzini!--Yes, but first
  Set down thy people's faults; set down the want
    Of soul-conviction; set down aims dispersed,
  And incoherent means, and valour scant
    Because of scanty faith, and schisms accursed
  That wrench these brother-hearts from covenant
    With freedom and each other. Set down this,
  And this, and see to overcome it when
    The seasons bring the fruits thou wilt not miss
  If wary. Let no cry of patriot men
    Distract thee from the stern analysis
  Of masses who cry only! keep thy ken
    Clear as thy soul is virtuous. Heroes' blood
  Splashed up against thy noble brow in Rome;
    Let such not blind thee to an interlude
  Which was not also holy, yet did come
    'Twixt sacramental actions,--brotherhood
  Despised even there, and something of the doom
    Of Remus in the trenches. Listen now--
  Rossi died silent near where Caesar died.
    HE did not say "My Brutus, is it thou?"
  But Italy unquestioned testified
    "_I_ killed him! _I_ am Brutus.--I avow."
  At which the whole world's laugh of scorn replied
    "A poor maimed copy of Brutus!"
                                    Too much like,
  Indeed, to be so unlike! too unskilled
    At Philippi and the honest battle-pike,
  To be so skilful where a man is killed
    Near Pompey's statue, and the daggers strike
  At unawares i' the throat. Was thus fulfilled
    An omen once of Michel Angelo?--
  When Marcus Brutus he conceived complete,
    And strove to hurl him out by blow on blow
  Upon the marble, at Art's thunderheat,
    Till haply (some pre-shadow rising slow
  Of what his Italy would fancy meet
    To be called BRUTUS) straight his plastic hand
  Fell back before his prophet-soul, and left
    A fragment, a maimed Brutus,--but more grand
  Than this, so named at Rome, was!
                                    Let thy weft
    Present one woof and warp, Mazzini! Stand
  With no man hankering for a dagger's heft,
    No, not for Italy!--nor stand apart,
  No, not for the Republic!--from those pure
    Brave men who hold the level of thy heart
  In patriot truth, as lover and as doer,
    Albeit they will not follow where thou art
  As extreme theorist. Trust and distrust fewer;
    And so bind strong and keep unstained the cause
  Which (God's sign granted) war-trumps newly blown
    Shall yet annunciate to the world's applause.

  But now, the world is busy; it has grown
    A Fair-going world. Imperial England draws
  The flowing ends of the earth from Fez, Canton,
    Delhi and Stockholm, Athens and Madrid,
  The Russias and the vast Americas,
    As if a queen drew in her robes amid
  Her golden cincture,--isles, peninsulas,
    Capes, continents, far inland countries hid
  By jasper-sands and hills of chrysopras,
    All trailing in their splendours through the door
  Of the gorgeous Crystal Palace. Every nation,
    To every other nation strange of yore,
  Gives face to face the civic salutation,
    And holds up in a proud right hand before
  That congress the best work which she can fashion
    By her best means. "These corals, will you please
  To match against your oaks? They grow as fast
    Within my wilderness of purple seas."--
  "This diamond stared upon me as I passed
    (As a live god's eye from a marble frieze)
  Along a dark of diamonds. Is it classed?"--
    "I wove these stuffs so subtly that the gold
  Swims to the surface of the silk like cream
    And curdles to fair patterns. Ye behold!"--
  "These delicatest muslins rather seem
    Than be, you think? Nay, touch them and be bold,
  Though such veiled Chakhi's face in Hafiz' dream."--
    "These carpets--you walk slow on them like kings,
  Inaudible like spirits, while your foot
    Dips deep in velvet roses and such things."--
  "Even Apollonius might commend this flute:[13]
    The music, winding through the stops, upsprings
  To make the player very rich: compute!"
    "Here's goblet-glass, to take in with your wine
  The very sun its grapes were ripened under:
    Drink light and juice together, and each fine."--
  "This model of a steamship moves your wonder?
    You should behold it crushing down the brine
  Like a blind Jove who feels his way with thunder."--
    "Here's sculpture! Ah, _we_ live too! why not throw
  Our life into our marbles? Art has place
    For other artists after Angelo."--
  "I tried to paint out here a natural face;
    For nature includes Raffael, as we know,
  Not Raffael nature. Will it help my case?"--
    "Methinks you will not match this steel of ours!"--
  "Nor you this porcelain! One might dream the clay
    Retained in it the larvae of the flowers,
  They bud so, round the cup, the old Spring-way."--
    "Nor you these carven woods, where birds in bowers
  With twisting snakes and climbing cupids, play."

    O Magi of the east and of the west,
  Your incense, gold and myrrh are excellent!--
    What gifts for Christ, then, bring ye with the rest?
  Your hands have worked well: is your courage spent
    In handwork only? Have you nothing best,
  Which generous souls may perfect and present,
    And He shall thank the givers for? no light
  Of teaching, liberal nations, for the poor
    Who sit in darkness when it is not night?
  No cure for wicked children? Christ,--no cure!
    No help for women sobbing out of sight
  Because men made the laws? no brothel-lure
    Burnt out by popular lightnings? Hast thou four
  No remedy, my England, for such woes?
    No outlet, Austria, for the scourged and bound,
  No entrance for the exiled? no repose,
    Russia, for knouted Poles worked underground,
  And gentle ladies bleached among the snows?
    No mercy for the slave, America?
  No hope for Rome, free France, chivalric France?
    Alas, great nations have great shames, I say.
  No pity, O world, no tender utterance
    Of benediction, and prayers stretched this way
  For poor Italia, baffled by mischance?
    O gracious nations, give some ear to me!
  You all go to your Fair, and I am one
    Who at the roadside of humanity
  Beseech your alms,--God's justice to be done.
    So, prosper!

                  In the name of Italy,
  Meantime, her patriot Dead have benison.
    They only have done well; and, what they did
  Being perfect, it shall triumph. Let them slumber:
    No king of Egypt in a pyramid
  Is safer from oblivion, though he number
    Full seventy cerements for a coverlid.
  These Dead be seeds of life, and shall encumber
    The sad heart of the land until it loose
  The clammy clods and let out the Spring-growth
    In beatific green through every bruise.
  The tyrant should take heed to what he doth,
    Since every victim-carrion turns to use,
  And drives a chariot, like a god made wroth,
    Against each piled injustice. Ay, the least,
  Dead for Italia, not in vain has died;
    Though many vainly, ere life's struggle ceased,
  To mad dissimilar ends have swerved aside;
    Each grave her nationality has pieced
  By its own majestic breadth, and fortified
    And pinned it deeper to the soil. Forlorn
  Of thanks be, therefore, no one of these graves!
    Not Hers,--who, at her husband's side, in scorn,
  Outfaced the whistling shot and hissing waves,
    Until she felt her little babe unborn
  Recoil, within her, from the violent staves
    And bloodhounds of the world,--at which, her life
  Dropt inwards from her eyes and followed it
    Beyond the hunters. Garibaldi's wife
  And child died so. And now, the seaweeds fit
    Her body, like a proper shroud and coif,
  And murmurously the ebbing waters grit
    The little pebbles while she lies interred
  In the sea-sand. Perhaps, ere dying thus,
    She looked up in his face (which never stirred
  From its clenched anguish) as to make excuse
    For leaving him for his, if so she erred.
  He well remembers that she could not choose.
    A memorable grave! Another is
  At Genoa. There, a king may fitly lie,
    Who, bursting that heroic heart of his
  At lost Novara, that he could not die
    (Though thrice into the cannon's eyes for this
  He plunged his shuddering steed, and felt the sky
    Reel back between the fire-shocks), stripped away
  The ancestral ermine ere the smoke had cleared,
    And, naked to the soul, that none might say
  His kingship covered what was base and bleared
    With treason, went out straight an exile, yea,
  An exiled patriot. Let him be revered.

    Yea, verily, Charles Albert has died well;
  And if he lived not all so, as one spoke,
    The sin pass softly with the passing-bell;
  For he was shriven, I think, in cannon-smoke,
    And, taking off his crown, made visible
  A hero's forehead. Shaking Austria's yoke
    He shattered his own hand and heart. "So best,"
  His last words were upon his lonely bed,
    I do not end like popes and dukes at least--
  "Thank God for it." And now that he is dead,
    Admitting it is proved and manifest
  That he was worthy, with a discrowned head,
    To measure heights with patriots, let them stand
  Beside the man in his Oporto shroud,
    And each vouchsafe to take him by the hand,
  And kiss him on the cheek, and say aloud,--
    "Thou, too, hast suffered for our native land!
  My brother, thou art one of us! be proud."

    Still, graves, when Italy is talked upon.
  Still, still, the patriot's tomb, the stranger's hate.
    Still Niobe! still fainting in the sun,
  By whose most dazzling arrows violate
    Her beauteous offspring perished! has she won
  Nothing but garlands for the graves, from Fate?
    Nothing but death-songs?--Yes, be it understood
  Life throbs in noble Piedmont! while the feet
    Of Rome's clay image, dabbled soft in blood,
  Grow flat with dissolution and, as meet,
    Will soon be shovelled off like other mud,
  To leave the passage free in church and street.
    And I, who first took hope up in this song,
  Because a child was singing one ... behold,
    The hope and omen were not, haply, wrong!
  Poets are soothsayers still, like those of old
    Who studied flights of doves; and creatures young
  And tender, mighty meanings may unfold.

    The sun strikes, through the windows, up the floor;
  Stand out in it, my own young Florentine,
    Not two years old, and let me see thee more!
  It grows along thy amber curls, to shine
    Brighter than elsewhere. Now, look straight before,
  And fix thy brave blue English eyes on mine,
    And from my soul, which fronts the future so,
  With unabashed and unabated gaze,
    Teach me to hope for, what the angels know
  When they smile clear as thou dost. Down God's ways
    With just alighted feet, between the snow
  And snowdrops, where a little lamb may graze,
    Thou hast no fear, my lamb, about the road,
  Albeit in our vain-glory we assume
    That, less than we have, thou hast learnt of God.
  Stand out, my blue-eyed prophet!--thou, to whom
    The earliest world-day light that ever flowed,
  Through Casa Guidi Windows chanced to come!
    Now shake the glittering nimbus of thy hair,
  And be God's witness that the elemental
    New springs of life are gushing everywhere
  To cleanse the watercourses, and prevent all
    Concrete obstructions which infest the air!
  That earth's alive, and gentle or ungentle
    Motions within her, signify but growth!--
  The ground swells greenest o'er the labouring moles.

    Howe'er the uneasy world is vexed and wroth,
  Young children, lifted high on parent souls,
    Look round them with a smile upon the mouth,
  And take for music every bell that tolls;
    (WHO said we should be better if like these?)
  But _we_ sit murmuring for the future though
    Posterity is smiling on our knees,
  Convicting us of folly. Let us go--
    We will trust God. The blank interstices
  Men take for ruins, He will build into
    With pillared marbles rare, or knit across
  With generous arches, till the fane's complete.
    This world has no perdition, if some loss.

  Such cheer I gather from thy smiling, Sweet!
    The self-same cherub-faces which emboss
  The Vail, lean inward to the Mercy-seat.


FOOTNOTES:

  [12] See the opening passage of the "Agamemnon" of AEschylus.

  [13] Philostratus relates of Apollonius how he objected to the musical
       instrument of Linus the Rhodian that it could not enrich or
       beautify. The history of music in our day would satisfy the
       philosopher on one point at least.




POEMS BEFORE CONGRESS


PREFACE.


These poems were written under the pressure of the events they
indicate, after a residence in Italy of so many years that the present
triumph of great principles is heightened to the writer's feelings by
the disastrous issue of the last movement, witnessed from "Casa Guidi
Windows" in 1849. Yet, if the verses should appear to English readers
too pungently rendered to admit of a patriotic respect to the English
sense of things, I will not excuse myself on such grounds, nor on the
ground of my attachment to the Italian people and my admiration of
their heroic constancy and union. What I have written has simply been
written because I love truth and justice _quand meme_,--"more than
Plato" and Plato's country, more than Dante and Dante's country, more
even than Shakespeare and Shakespeare's country.

And if patriotism means the flattery of one's nation in every case,
then the patriot, take it as you please, is merely the courtier which
I am not, though I have written "Napoleon III. in Italy." It is time
to limit the significance of certain terms, or to enlarge the
significance of certain things. Nationality is excellent in its
place; and the instinct of self-love is the root of a man, which will
develop into sacrificial virtues. But all the virtues are means and
uses; and, if we hinder their tendency to growth and expansion, we
both destroy them as virtues, and degrade them to that rankest
species of corruption reserved for the most noble organizations. For
instance,--non-intervention in the affairs of neighbouring states is a
high political virtue; but non-intervention does not mean, passing
by on the other side when your neighbour falls among thieves,--or
Phariseeism would recover it from Christianity. Freedom itself is
virtue, as well as privilege; but freedom of the seas does not mean
piracy, nor freedom of the land, brigandage; nor freedom of the
senate, freedom to cudgel a dissident member; nor freedom of the
press, freedom to calumniate and lie. So, if patriotism be a virtue
indeed, it cannot mean an exclusive devotion to our country's
interests,--for that is only another form of devotion to personal
interests, family interests, or provincial interests, all of which,
if not driven past themselves, are vulgar and immoral objects. Let
us put away the Little Peddlingtonism unworthy of a great nation, and
too prevalent among us. If the man who does not look beyond this
natural life is of a somewhat narrow order, what must be the man who
does not look beyond his own frontier or his own sea?

I confess that I dream of the day when an English statesman shall
arise with a heart too large for England; having courage in the face
of his countrymen to assert of some suggested policy,--"This is good
for your trade; this is necessary for your domination: but it will vex
a people hard by; it will hurt a people farther off; it will profit
nothing to the general humanity: therefore, away with it!--it is not
for you or for me." When a British minister dares speak so, and when a
British public applauds him speaking, then shall the nation be
glorious, and her praise, instead of exploding from within, from loud
civic mouths, come to her from without, as all worthy praise must,
from the alliances she has fostered and the populations she has
saved.

And poets who write of the events of that time shall not need to
justify themselves in prefaces for ever so little jarring of the
national sentiment imputable to their rhymes.

ROME: _February 1860_.




NAPOLEON III. IN ITALY.


  I.

  Emperor, Emperor!
  From the centre to the shore,
    From the Seine back to the Rhine,
  Stood eight millions up and swore
    By their manhood's right divine
  So to elect and legislate,
    This man should renew the line
  Broken in a strain of fate
  And leagued kings at Waterloo,
  When the people's hands let go.
          Emperor
          Evermore.

  II.

  With a universal shout
  They took the old regalia out
  From an open grave that day;
    From a grave that would not close,
  Where the first Napoleon lay
    Expectant, in repose,
  As still as Merlin, with his conquering face
    Turned up in its unquenchable appeal
  To men and heroes of the advancing race,--
    Prepared to set the seal
  Of what has been on what shall be.
          Emperor
          Evermore.

  III.

  The thinkers stood aside
    To let the nation act.
    Some hated the new-constituted fact
  Of empire, as pride treading on their pride.
  Some quailed, lest what was poisonous in the past
    Should graft itself in that Druidic bough
      On this green Now.
  Some cursed, because at last
  The open heavens to which they had looked in vain
  For many a golden fall of marvellous rain
  Were closed in brass; and some
  Wept on because a gone thing could not come;
  And some were silent, doubting all things for
  That popular conviction,--evermore
          Emperor.

  IV.

  That day I did not hate
    Nor doubt, nor quail nor curse.
  I, reverencing the people, did not bate
  My reverence of their deed and oracle,
  Nor vainly prate
    Of better and of worse
  Against the great conclusion of their will.
    And yet, O voice and verse,
  Which God set in me to acclaim and sing
  Conviction, exaltation, aspiration,
  We gave no music to the patent thing,
    Nor spared a holy rhythm to throb and swim
    About the name of him
  Translated to the sphere of domination
    By democratic passion!
  I was not used, at least,
    Nor can be, now or then,
  To stroke the ermine beast
    On any kind of throne
    (Though builded by a nation for its own),
  And swell the surging choir for kings of men--
          "Emperor
          Evermore."

  V.

    But now, Napoleon, now
  That, leaving far behind the purple throng
    Of vulgar monarchs, thou
    Tread'st higher in thy deed
    Than stair of throne can lead,
    To help in the hour of wrong
    The broken hearts of nations to be strong,--
    Now, lifted as thou art
    To the level of pure song,
  We stand to meet thee on these Alpine snows!
    And while the palpitating peaks break out
  Ecstatic from somnambular repose
    With answers to the presence and the shout,
  We, poets of the people, who take part
    With elemental justice, natural right,
  Join in our echoes also, nor refrain.
    We meet thee, O Napoleon, at this height
  At last, and find thee great enough to praise.
  Receive the poet's chrism, which smells beyond
    The priest's, and pass thy ways;--
  An English poet warns thee to maintain
  God's word, not England's:--let His truth be true
  And all men liars! with His truth respond
  To all men's lie. Exalt the sword and smite
  On that long anvil of the Apennine
  Where Austria forged the Italian chain in view
  Of seven consenting nations, sparks of fine Admonitory light,
  Till men's eyes wink before convictions new.
  Flash in God's justice to the world's amaze,
  Sublime Deliverer!--after many days
  Found worthy of the deed thou art come to do--
          Emperor.
          Evermore.

  VI.

    But Italy, my Italy,
      Can it last, this gleam?
    Can she live and be strong,
      Or is it another dream
  Like the rest we have dreamed so long?
    And shall it, must it be,
  That after the battle-cloud has broken
      She will die off again
      Like the rain,
    Or like a poet's song
      Sung of her, sad at the end
    Because her name is Italy,--
      Die and count no friend?
  Is it true,--may it be spoken,--
    That she who has lain so still,
  With a wound in her breast,
  And a flower in her hand,
  And a grave-stone under her head,
    While every nation at will
  Beside her has dared to stand,
  And flout her with pity and scorn,
    Saying "She is at rest,
  She is fair, she is dead,
  And, leaving room in her stead
  To Us who are later born,
    This is certainly best!"
  Saying "Alas, she is fair,
  Very fair, but dead,--give place,
  And so we have room for the race."
  --Can it be true, be true,
  That she lives anew?
  That she rises up at the shout of her sons,
    At the trumpet of France,
  And lives anew?--is it true
    That she has not moved in a trance,
  As in Forty-eight?
    When her eyes were troubled with blood
  Till she knew not friend from foe,
  Till her hand was caught in a strait
  Of her cerement and baffled so
    From doing the deed she would;
  And her weak foot stumbled across
  The grave of a king,
  And down she dropt at heavy loss,
    And we gloomily covered her face and said,
  "We have dreamed the thing;
    She is not alive, but dead."

  VII.

  Now, shall we say
    Our Italy lives indeed?
  And if it were not for the beat and bray
  Of drum and trump of martial men,
  Should we feel the underground heave and strain,
    Where heroes left their dust as a seed
  Sure to emerge one day?
  And if it were not for the rhythmic march
    Of France and Piedmont's double hosts,
    Should we hear the ghosts
  Thrill through ruined aisle and arch,
    Throb along the frescoed wall,
  Whisper an oath by that divine
  They left in picture, book, and stone,
    That Italy is not dead at all?
  Ay, if it were not for the tears in our eyes,
  These tears of a sudden passionate joy,
    Should we see her arise
  From the place where the wicked are overthrown,
  Italy, Italy--loosed at length
    From the tyrant's thrall,
  Pale and calm in her strength?
  Pale as the silver cross of Savoy
  When the hand that bears the flag is brave,
  And not a breath is stirring, save
    What is blown
  Over the war-trump's lip of brass,
  Ere Garibaldi forces the pass!

  VIII.

    Ay, it is so, even so.
    Ay, and it shall be so.
  Each broken stone that long ago
  She flung behind her as she went
  In discouragement and bewilderment
  Through the cairns of Time, and missed her way
  Between to-day and yesterday,
    Up springs a living man.
  And each man stands with his face in the light
    Of his own drawn sword,
  Ready to do what a hero can.
    Wall to sap, or river to ford,
  Cannon to front, or foe to pursue,
  Still ready to do, and sworn to be true,
    As a man and a patriot can.
    Piedmontese, Neapolitan,
  Lombard, Tuscan, Romagnole,
  Each man's body having a soul,--
  Count how many they stand,
  All of them sons of the land,
    Every live man there
  Allied to a dead man below,
    And the deadest with blood to spare
  To quicken a living hand
  In case it should ever be slow.
  Count how many they come
  To the beat of Piedmont's drum,
    With faces keener and grayer
    Than swords of the Austrian slayer,
  All set against the foe.
          "Emperor
          Evermore."

  IX.

  Out of the dust where they ground them;
    Out of the holes where they dogged them;
  Out of the hulks where they wound them
    In iron, tortured and flogged them;
  Out of the streets where they chased them,
    Taxed them, and then bayonetted them;
  Out of the homes where they spied on them
    (Using their daughters and wives);
    Out of the church where they fretted them,
  Rotted their souls and debased them,
    Trained them to answer with knives,
  Then cursed them all at their prayers!--
  Out of cold lands, not theirs,
  Where they exiled them, starved them, lied on them;
  Back they come like a wind, in vain
    Cramped up in the hills, that roars its road
  The stronger into the open plain,
  Or like a fire that burns the hotter
    And longer for the crust of cinder,
  Serving better the ends of the potter;
    Or like a restrained word of God,
    Fulfilling itself by what seems to hinder.
          "Emperor
          Evermore."

  X.

  Shout for France and Savoy!
    Shout for the helper and doer.
  Shout for the good sword's ring,
    Shout for the thought still truer.
  Shout for the spirits at large
  Who passed for the dead this spring,
    Whose living glory is sure.
  Shout for France and Savoy!
  Shout for the council and charge!
    Shout for the head of Cavour;
  And shout for the heart of a King
  That's great with a nation's joy!
    Shout for France and Savoy!

  XI.

  Take up the child, Macmahon, though
    Thy hand be red
    From Magenta's dead,
  And riding on, in front of the troop,
    In the dust of the whirlwind of war
  Through the gate of the city of Milan, stoop
  And take up the child to thy saddle-bow,
  Nor fear the touch as soft as a flower of his smile as clear as a
        star!
  Thou hast a right to the child, we say,
  Since the women are weeping for joy as they
  Who, by thy help and from this day,
    Shall be happy mothers indeed.
  They are raining flowers from terrace and roof:
    Take up the flower in the child.
  While the shout goes up of a nation freed
    And heroically self-reconciled,
  Till the snow on that peaked Alp aloof
  Starts, as feeling God's finger anew,
  And all those cold white marble fires
  Of mounting saints on the Duomo-spires
    Flicker against the Blue.
          "Emperor
          Evermore."

  XII.

      Ay, it is He,
  Who rides at the King's right hand!
  Leave room to his horse and draw to the side,
    Nor press too near in the ecstasy
  Of a newly delivered impassioned land:
    He is moved, you see,
  He who has done it all.
  They call it a cold stern face;
    But this is Italy
  Who rises up to her place!--
  For this he fought in his youth,
  Of this he dreamed in the past;
    The lines of the resolute mouth
    Tremble a little at last.
    Cry, he has done it all!
          "Emperor
          Evermore."

  XIII.

  It is not strange that he did it,
    Though the deed may seem to strain
  To the wonderful, unpermitted,
    For such as lead and reign.
  But he is strange, this man:
    The people's instinct found him
  (A wind in the dark that ran
  Through a chink where was no door),
    And elected him and crowned him
          Emperor
          Evermore.

  XIV.

  Autocrat? let them scoff,
    Who fail to comprehend
  That a ruler incarnate of
    The people must transcend
  All common king-born kings;
  These subterranean springs
  A sudden outlet winning
    Have special virtues to spend.
  The people's blood runs through him,
    Dilates from head to foot,
    Creates him absolute,
  And from this great beginning
    Evokes a greater end
  To justify and renew him--
          Emperor
          Evermore.

  XV.

  What! did any maintain
  That God or the people (think!)
  Could make a marvel in vain?--
    Out of the water-jar there,
  Draw wine that none could drink?
  Is this a man like the rest,
    This miracle, made unaware
    By a rapture of popular air,
  And caught to the place that was best?
  You think he could barter and cheat
    As vulgar diplomates use,
  With the people's heart in his breast?
  Prate a lie into shape
  Lest truth should cumber the road;
    Play at the fast and loose
  Till the world is strangled with tape;
  Maim the soul's complete
    To fit the hole of a toad;
  And filch the dogman's meat
    To feed the offspring of God?

  XVI.

  Nay, but he, this wonder,
    He cannot palter nor prate,
  Though many around him and under,
  With intellects trained to the curve,
  Distrust him in spirit and nerve
    Because his meaning is straight.
  Measure him ere he depart
    With those who have governed and led;
  Larger so much by the heart,
    Larger so much by the head.
          Emperor
          Evermore.

  XVII.

  He holds that, consenting or dissident,
    Nations must move with the time;
  Assumes that crime with a precedent
    Doubles the guilt of the crime;
  --Denies that a slaver's bond,
    Or a treaty signed by knaves
  (_Quorum magna pars_, and beyond
  Was one of an honest name),
  Gives an inexpugnable claim
    To abolish men into slaves.
          Emperor
          Evermore.

  XVIII.

  He will not swagger nor boast
    Of his country's meeds, in a tone
  Missuiting a great man most
    If such should speak of his own;
  Nor will he act, on her side,
    From motives baser, indeed,
  Than a man of a noble pride
    Can avow for himself at need;
  Never, for lucre or laurels,
    Or custom, though such should be rife,
  Adapting the smaller morals
    To measure the larger life.
  He, though the merchants persuade,
    And the soldiers are eager for strife,
  Finds not his country in quarrels
    Only to find her in trade,--
  While still he accords her such honour
    As never to flinch for her sake
  Where men put service upon her,
    Found heavy to undertake
  And scarcely like to be paid:
  Believing a nation may act
    Unselfishly--shiver a lance
  (As the least of her sons may, in fact)
    And not for a cause of finance.
          Emperor
          Evermore.

  XIX.

    Great is he
  Who uses his greatness for all.
  His name shall stand perpetually
    As a name to applaud and cherish,
  Not only within the civic wall
  For the loyal, but also without
    For the generous and free.
    Just is he,
  Who is just for the popular due
    As well as the private debt.
  The praise of nations ready to perish
  Fall on him,--crown him in view
    Of tyrants caught in the net,
  And statesmen dizzy with fear and doubt!
  And though, because they are many,
    And he is merely one,
  And nations selfish and cruel
  Heap up the inquisitor's fuel
    To kill the body of high intents,
  And burn great deeds from their place,
  Till this, the greatest of any,
    May seem imperfectly done;
    Courage, whoever circumvents!
  Courage, courage, whoever is base!
  The soul of a high intent, be it known,
  Can die no more than any soul
  Which God keeps by Him under the throne;
  And this, at whatever interim,
    Shall live, and be consummated
  Into the being of deeds made whole.
  Courage, courage! happy is he,
    Of whom (himself among the dead
    And silent) this word shall be said:
  --That he might have had the world with him,
    But chose to side with suffering men,
    And had the world against him when
  He came to deliver Italy.
          Emperor
          Evermore.




THE DANCE.


  I.

  You remember down at Florence our Cascine,
    Where the people on the feast-days walk and drive,
  And, through the trees, long-drawn in many a green way,
    O'er-roofing hum and murmur like a hive,
    The river and the mountains look alive?

  II.

  You remember the piazzone there, the stand-place
    Of carriages a-brim with Florence Beauties,
  Who lean and melt to music as the band plays,
    Or smile and chat with someone who a-foot is,
    Or on horseback, in observance of male duties?

  III.

  'T is so pretty, in the afternoons of summer,
    So many gracious faces brought together!
  Call it rout, or call it concert, they have come here,
    In the floating of the fan and of the feather,
    To reciprocate with beauty the fine weather.

  IV.

  While the flower-girls offer nosegays (because _they_ too
    Go with other sweets) at every carriage-door;
  Here, by shake of a white finger, signed away to
    Some next buyer, who sits buying score on score,
    Piling roses upon roses evermore.

  V.

  And last season, when the French camp had its station
    In the meadow-ground, things quickened and grew gayer
  Through the mingling of the liberating nation
    With this people; groups of Frenchmen everywhere,
    Strolling, gazing, judging lightly--"who was fair."

  VI.

  Then the noblest lady present took upon her
    To speak nobly from her carriage for the rest:
  "Pray these officers from France to do us honour
    By dancing with us straightway." The request
    Was gravely apprehended as addressed.

  VII.

  And the men of France, bareheaded, bowing lowly,
    Led out each a proud signora to the space
  Which the startled crowd had rounded for them--slowly,
    Just a touch of still emotion in his face,
    Not presuming, through the symbol, on the grace.

  VIII.

  There was silence in the people: some lips trembled,
    But none jested. Broke the music, at a glance:
  And the daughters of our princes, thus assembled,
    Stepped the measure with the gallant sons of France,
    Hush! it might have been a Mass, and not a dance.


  IX.

  And they danced there till the blue that overskied us
    Swooned with passion, though the footing seemed sedate;
  And the mountains, heaving mighty hearts beside us,
    Sighed a rapture in a shadow, to dilate,
    And touch the holy stone where Dante sate.

  X.

  Then the sons of France, bareheaded, lowly bowing,
    Led the ladies back where kinsmen of the south
  Stood, received them; till, with burst of overflowing
    Feeling--husbands, brothers, Florence's male youth,
    Turned, and kissed the martial strangers mouth to mouth.

  XI.

  And a cry went up, a cry from all that people!
    --You have heard a people cheering, you suppose,
  For the Member, mayor ... with chorus from the steeple?
    This was different: scarce as loud, perhaps (who knows?),
    For we saw wet eyes around us ere the close.

  XII.

  And we felt as if a nation, too long borne in
    By hard wrongers,--comprehending in such attitude
  That God had spoken somewhere since the morning,
    That men were somehow brothers, by no platitude,--
    Cried exultant in great wonder and free gratitude.




A TALE OF VILLAFRANCA.

TOLD IN TUSCANY.


  I.

  My little son, my Florentine,
    Sit down beside my knee,
  And I will tell you why the sign
    Of joy which flushed our Italy
  Has faded since but yesternight;
  And why your Florence of delight
    Is mourning as you see.

  II.

  A great man (who was crowned one day)
    Imagined a great Deed:
  He shaped it out of cloud and clay,
    He touched it finely till the seed
  Possessed the flower: from heart and brain
  He fed it with large thoughts humane,
    To help a people's need.

  III.

  He brought it out into the sun--
    They blessed it to his face:
  "O great pure Deed, that hast undone
    So many bad and base!
  O generous Deed, heroic Deed,
  Come forth, be perfected, succeed,
    Deliver by God's grace."

  IV.

  Then sovereigns, statesmen, north and south,
    Rose up in wrath and fear,
  And cried, protesting by one mouth,
    "What monster have we here?
  A great Deed at this hour of day?
  A great just Deed--and not for pay?
    Absurd,--or insincere."

  V.

  "And if sincere, the heavier blow
    In that case we shall bear,
  For where's our blessed 'status quo,'
    Our holy treaties, where,--
  Our rights to sell a race, or buy,
  Protect and pillage, occupy,
    And civilize despair?"

  VI.

  Some muttered that the great Deed meant
    A great pretext to sin;
  And others, the pretext, so lent,
    Was heinous (to begin).
  Volcanic terms of "great" and "just"?
  Admit such tongues of flame, the crust
    Of time and law falls in.

  VII.

  A great Deed in this world of ours?
    Unheard of the pretence is:
  It threatens plainly the great Powers;
    Is fatal in all senses.
  A just Deed in the world?--call out
  The rifles! be not slack about
    The national defences.

  VIII.

  And many murmured, "From this source
    What red blood must be poured!"
  And some rejoined, "'T is even worse;
    What red tape is ignored!"
  All cursed the Doer for an evil
  Called here, enlarging on the Devil,--
    There, monkeying the Lord!

  IX.

  Some said it could not be explained,
    Some, could not be excused;
  And others, "Leave it unrestrained,
    Gehenna's self is loosed."
  And all cried "Crush it, maim it, gag it!
  Set dog-toothed lies to tear it ragged,
    Truncated and traduced!"

  X.

  But HE stood sad before the sun
    (The peoples felt their fate).
  "The world is many,--I am one;
    My great Deed was too great.
  God's fruit of justice ripens slow:
  Men's souls are narrow; let them grow.
    My brothers, we must wait."

  XI.

  The tale is ended, child of mine,
    Turned graver at my knee.
  They say your eyes, my Florentine,
    Are English: it may be.
  And yet I've marked as blue a pair
  Following the doves across the square
    At Venice by the sea.

  XII.

  Ah child! ah child! I cannot say
    A word more. You conceive
  The reason now, why just to-day
    We see our Florence grieve.
  Ah child, look up into the sky!
  In this low world, where great Deeds die,
    What matter if we live?




A COURT LADY.


  I.

  Her hair was tawny with gold, her eyes with purple were dark,
  Her cheeks' pale opal burnt with a red and restless spark.

  II.

  Never was lady of Milan nobler in name and in race;
  Never was lady of Italy fairer to see in the face.

  III.

  Never was lady on earth more true as woman and wife,
  Larger in judgment and instinct, prouder in manners and life.

  IV.

  She stood in the early morning, and said to her maidens "Bring
  That silken robe made ready to wear at the Court of the King.

  V.

  "Bring me the clasps of diamond, lucid, clear of the mote,
  Clasp me the large at the waist, and clasp me the small at the
        throat.

  VI.

  "Diamonds to fasten the hair, and diamonds to fasten the sleeves,
  Laces to drop from their rays, like a powder of snow from the
        eaves."

  VII.

  Gorgeous she entered the sunlight which gathered her up in a flame,
  While, straight in her open carriage, she to the hospital came.

  VIII.

  In she went at the door, and gazing from end to end,
  "Many and low are the pallets, but each is the place of a friend."

  IX.

  Up she passed through the wards, and stood at a young man's bed:
  Bloody the band on his brow, and livid the droop of his head.

  X.

  "Art thou a Lombard, my brother? Happy art thou," she cried,
  And smiled like Italy on him: he dreamed in her face and died.

  XI.

  Pale with his passing soul, she went on still to a second:
  He was a grave hard man, whose years by dungeons were reckoned.

  XII.

  Wounds in his body were sore, wounds in his life were sorer.
  "Art thou a Romagnole?" Her eyes drove lightnings before her.

  XIII.

  "Austrian and priest had joined to double and tighten the cord
  Able to bind thee, O strong one,--free by the stroke of a sword.

  XIV.

  "Now be grave for the rest of us, using the life overcast
  To ripen our wine of the present (too new) in glooms of the past."

  XV.

  Down she stepped to a pallet where lay a face like a girl's,
  Young, and pathetic with dying,--a deep black hole in the curls.

  XVI.

  "Art thou from Tuscany, brother? and seest thou, dreaming in pain,
  Thy mother stand in the piazza, searching the List of the slain?"

  XVII.

  Kind as a mother herself, she touched his cheeks with her hands:
  "Blessed is she who has borne thee, although she should weep as she
        stands."

  XVIII.

  On she passed to a Frenchman, his arm carried off by a ball:
  Kneeling,--"O more than my brother! how shall I thank thee for all?

  XIX.

  "Each of the heroes around us has fought for his land and line,
  But thou hast fought for a stranger, in hate of a wrong not thine.

  XX.

  "Happy are all free peoples, too strong to be dispossessed.
  But blessed are those among nations who dare to be strong for the
        rest!"

  XXI.

  Ever she passed on her way, and came to a couch where pined
  One with a face from Venetia, white with a hope out of mind.

  XXII.

  Long she stood and gazed, and twice she tried at the name,
  But two great crystal tears were all that faltered and came.

  XXIII.

  Only a tear for Venice?--she turned as in passion and loss,
  And stooped to his forehead and kissed it, as if she were kissing
        the cross.

  XXIV.

  Faint with that strain of heart she moved on then to another,
  Stern and strong in his death. "And dost thou suffer, my brother?"

  XXV.

  Holding his hands in hers:--"Out of the Piedmont lion
  Cometh the sweetness of freedom! sweetest to live or to die on."

  XXVI.

  Holding his cold rough hands,--"Well, oh well have ye done
  In noble, noble Piedmont, who would not be noble alone."

  XXVII.

  Back he fell while she spoke. She rose to her feet with a spring,--
  "That was a Piedmontese! and this is the Court of the King."




AN AUGUST VOICE.

"Una voce augusta."--_Monitore Toscano_.


  I.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    I made the treaty upon it.
  Just venture a quiet rebuke;
    Dall' Ongaro write him a sonnet;
  Ricasoli gently explain
    Some need of the constitution:
  He'll swear to it over again,
    Providing an "easy solution."
  You'll call back the Grand-duke.

  II.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    I promised the Emperor Francis
  To argue the case by his book,
    And ask you to meet his advances.
  The Ducal cause, we know
    (Whether you or he be the wronger),
  Has very strong points;--although
    Your bayonets, there, have stronger.
  You'll call back the Grand-duke.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    He is not pure altogether.
  For instance, the oath which he took
    (In the Forty-eight rough weather)
  He'd "nail your flag to his mast,"
    Then softly scuttled the boat you
  Hoped to escape in at last,
    And both by a "Proprio motu."
  You'll call back the Grand-duke.

  IV.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    The scheme meets nothing to shock it
  In this smart letter, look,
    We found in Radetsky's pocket;
  Where his Highness in sprightly style
    Of the flower of his Tuscans wrote,
  "These heads be the hottest in file;
    Pray shoot them the quickest." Quote,
  And call back the Grand-duke.

  V.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    There _are_ some things to object to.
  He cheated, betrayed, and forsook,
    Then called in the foe to protect you.
  He taxed you for wines and for meats
    Throughout that eight years' pastime
  Of Austria's drum in your streets--
    Of course you remember the last time
  You called back your Grand-duke?

  VI.

  You'll take back the Grand-duke?
    It is not race he is poor in,
  Although he never could brook
    The patriot cousin at Turin.
  His love of kin you discern,
    By his hate of your flag and me--
  So decidedly apt to turn
    All colours at the sight of the Three.[14]
  You'll call back the Grand-duke.

  VII.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    'T was weak that he fled from the Pitti;
  But consider how little he shook
    At thought of bombarding your city!
  And, balancing that with this,
    The Christian rule is plain for us;
  ... Or the Holy Father's Swiss
    Have shot his Perugians in vain for us.
  You'll call back the Grand-duke.

  VIII.

  Pray take back your Grand-duke.
    --I, too, have suffered persuasion.
  All Europe, raven and rook,
    Screeched at me armed for your nation.
  Your cause in my heart struck spurs;
    I swept such warnings aside for you:
  My very child's eyes, and Hers,
    Grew like my brother's who died for you.
  You'll call back the Grand-duke?

  IX.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    My French fought nobly with reason,--
  Left many a Lombardy nook
    Red as with wine out of season.
  Little we grudged what was done there,
    Paid freely your ransom of blood:
  Our heroes stark in the sun there
    We would not recall if we could.
  You'll call back the Grand-duke?

  X.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    His son rode fast as he got off
  That day on the enemy's hook,
    When _I_ had an epaulette shot off.
  Though splashed (as I saw him afar--no
    Near) by those ghastly rains,
  The mark, when you've washed him in Arno,
    Will scarcely be larger than Cain's.
  You'll call back the Grand-duke?

  XI.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    'T will be so simple, quite beautiful:
  The shepherd recovers his crook,
    ... If you should be sheep, and dutiful.
  I spoke a word worth chalking
    On Milan's wall--but stay,
  Here's Poniatowsky talking,--
    You'll listen to _him_ to-day,
  And call back the Grand-duke.

  XII.

  You'll take back your Grand-duke?
    Observe, there's no one to force it,--
  Unless the Madonna, Saint Luke
    Drew for you, choose to endorse it.
  _I_ charge you, by great Saint Martino
    And prodigies quickened by wrong,
  Remember your Dead on Ticino;
    Be worthy, be constant, be strong--
  Bah!--call back the Grand-duke!!


FOOTNOTES:

  [14] The Italian tricolor: red, green, and white.




CHRISTMAS GIFTS.

  ~hos basilei, hos theps, hos nekrps.~
  GREGORY NAZIANZEN.


  I.

  The Pope on Christmas Day
    Sits in Saint Peter's chair;
  But the peoples murmur and say
    "Our souls are sick and forlorn,
  And who will show us where
    Is the stable where Christ was born?"

  II.

  The star is lost in the dark;
    The manger is lost in the straw;
  The Christ cries faintly ... hark!...
    Through bands that swaddle and strangle--
  But the Pope in the chair of awe
    Looks down the great quadrangle.

  III.

  The Magi kneel at his foot,
    Kings of the East and West,
  But, instead of the angels (mute
    Is the "Peace on earth" of their song),
  The peoples, perplexed and opprest,
    Are sighing "How long, how long?"

  IV.

  And, instead of the kine, bewilder in
    Shadow of aisle and dome,
  The bear who tore up the children,
    The fox who burnt up the corn,
  And the wolf who suckled at Rome
    Brothers to slay and to scorn.

  V.

  Cardinals left and right of him,
    Worshippers round and beneath,
  The silver trumpets at sight of him
    Thrill with a musical blast:
  But the people say through their teeth,
    "Trumpets? we wait for the Last!"

  VI.

  He sits in the place of the Lord,
    And asks for the gifts of the time;
  Gold, for the haft of a sword
    To win back Romagna averse,
  Incense, to sweeten a crime,
    And myrrh, to embitter a curse.

  VII.

  Then a king of the West said "Good!--
    I bring thee the gifts of the time;
  Red, for the patriot's blood,
    Green, for the martyr's crown,
  White, for the dew and the rime,
    When the morning of God comes down."

  VIII.

  --O mystic tricolor bright!
    The Pope's heart quailed like a man's;
  The cardinals froze at the sight,
    Bowing their tonsures hoary:
  And the eyes in the peacock-fans
    Winked at the alien glory.

  IX.

  But the peoples exclaimed in hope,
    "Now blessed be he who has brought
  These gifts of the time to the Pope,
    When our souls were sick and forlorn.
  --And _here_ is the star we sought,
    To show us where Christ was born!"




ITALY AND THE WORLD.


  I.

  Florence, Bologna, Parma, Modena:
    When you named them a year ago,
  So many graves reserved by God, in a
    Day of Judgment, you seemed to know,
  To open and let out the resurrection.

  II.

  And meantime (you made your reflection
    If you were English), was nought to be done
  But sorting sables, in predilection
    For all those martyrs dead and gone,
  Till the new earth and heaven made ready.

  III.

  And if your politics were not heady,
    Violent, ... "Good," you added, "good
  In all things! Mourn on sure and steady.
    Churchyard thistles are wholesome food
  For our European wandering asses.

  IV.

  "The date of the resurrection passes
    Human foreknowledge: men unborn
  Will gain by it (even in the lower classes),
    But none of these. It is not the morn
  Because the cock of France is crowing.

  V.

  "Cocks crow at midnight, seldom knowing
    Starlight from dawn-light! 't is a mad
  Poor creature." Here you paused, and growing
    Scornful,--suddenly, let us add,
  The trumpet sounded, the graves were open.

  VI.

  Life and life and life! agrope in
    The dusk of death, warm hands, stretched out
  For swords, proved more life still to hope in,
    Beyond and behind. Arise with a shout,
  Nation of Italy, slain and buried!

  VII.

  Hill to hill and turret to turret
    Flashing the tricolor,--newly created
  Beautiful Italy, calm, unhurried,
    Rise heroic and renovated,
  Rise to the final restitution.

  VIII.

  Rise; prefigure the grand solution
    Of earth's municipal, insular schisms,--
  Statesmen draping self-love's conclusion
    In cheap vernacular patriotisms,
  Unable to give up Judaea for Jesus.

  IX.

  Bring us the higher example; release us
    Into the larger coming time:
  And into Christ's broad garment piece us
    Rags of virtue as poor as crime,
  National selfishness, civic vaunting.

  X.

  No more Jew nor Greek then,--taunting
    Nor taunted;--no more England nor France!
  But one confederate brotherhood planting
    One flag only, to mark the advance,
  Onward and upward, of all humanity.

  XI.

  For civilization perfected
    Is fully developed Christianity.
  "Measure the frontier," shall it be said,
    "Count the ships," in national vanity?
  --Count the nation's heart-beats sooner.

  XII.

  For, though behind by a cannon or schooner,
    That nation still is predominant
  Whose pulse beats quickest in zeal to oppugn or
    Succour another, in wrong or want,
  Passing the frontier in love and abhorrence.

  XIII.

  Modena, Parma, Bologna, Florence,
    Open us out the wider way!
  Dwarf in that chapel of old Saint Lawrence
    Your Michel Angelo's giant Day,
  With the grandeur of this Day breaking o'er us!

  XIV.

  Ye who, restrained as an ancient chorus,
    Mute while the coryphaeus spake,
  Hush your separate voices before us,
    Sink your separate lives for the sake
  Of one sole Italy's living for ever!

  XV.

  Givers of coat and cloak too,--never
    Grudging that purple of yours at the best,
  By your heroic will and endeavour
    Each sublimely dispossessed,
  That all may inherit what each surrenders!

  XVI.

  Earth shall bless you, O noble emenders
    On egotist nations! Ye shall lead
  The plough of the world, and sow new splendours
    Into the furrow of things for seed,--
  Ever the richer for what ye have given.

  XVII.

  Lead us and teach us, till earth and heaven
    Grow larger around us and higher above.
  Our sacrament-bread has a bitter leaven;
    We bait our traps with the name of love,
  Till hate itself has a kinder meaning.

  XVIII.

  Oh, this world: this cheating and screening
    Of cheats! this conscience for candle-wicks,
  Not beacon-fires! this overweening
    Of underhand diplomatical tricks,
  Dared for the country while scorned for the counter!

  XIX.

  Oh, this envy of those who mount here,
    And oh, this malice to make them trip!
  Rather quenching the fire there, drying the fount here,
    To frozen body and thirsty lip,
  Than leave to a neighbour their ministration.

  XX.

  I cry aloud in my poet-passion,
    Viewing my England o'er Alp and sea.
  I loved her more in her ancient fashion:
    She carries her rifles too thick for me
  Who spares them so in the cause of a brother.

  XXI.

  Suspicion, panic? end this pother.
    The sword, kept sheathless at peace-time, rusts.
  None fears for himself while he feels for another:
    The brave man either fights or trusts,
  And wears no mail in his private chamber.

  XXII.

  Beautiful Italy! golden amber
    Warm with the kisses of lover and traitor!
  Thou who hast drawn us on to remember,
    Draw us to hope now: let us be greater
  By this new future than that old story.

  XXIII.

  Till truer glory replaces all glory,
    As the torch grows blind at the dawn of day;
  And the nations, rising up, their sorry
    And foolish sins shall put away,
  As children their toys when the teacher enters.

  XXIV.

  Till Love's one centre devour these centres
    Of many self-loves; and the patriot's trick
  To better his land by egotist ventures,
    Defamed from a virtue, shall make men sick,
  As the scalp at the belt of some red hero.

  XXV.

  For certain virtues have dropped to zero,
    Left by the sun on the mountain's dewy side;
  Churchman's charities, tender as Nero,
    Indian suttee, heathen suicide,
  Service to rights divine, proved hollow:

  XXVI.

  And Heptarchy patriotisms must follow.
    --National voices, distinct yet dependent,
  Ensphering each other, as swallow does swallow,
    With circles still widening and ever ascendant,
  In multiform life to united progression,--

  XXVII.

  These shall remain. And when, in the session
    Of nations, the separate language is heard,
  Each shall aspire, in sublime indiscretion,
    To help with a thought or exalt with a word
  Less her own than her rival's honour.

  XXVIII.

  Each Christian nation shall take upon her
    The law of the Christian man in vast:
  The crown of the getter shall fall to the donor,
    And last shall be first while first shall be last,
  And to love best shall still be, to reign unsurpassed.




A CURSE FOR A NATION.

PROLOGUE.


  I heard an angel speak last night,
        And he said "Write!
  Write a Nation's curse for me,
  And send it over the Western Sea."

  I faltered, taking up the word:
        "Not so, my lord!
  If curses must be, choose another
  To send thy curse against my brother.

  "For I am bound by gratitude,
        By love and blood,
  To brothers of mine across the sea,
  Who stretch out kindly hands to me."

  "Therefore," the voice said, "shalt thou write
        My curse to-night.
  From the summits of love a curse is driven,
  As lightning is from the tops of heaven."

  "Not so," I answered. "Evermore
        My heart is sore
  For my own land's sins: for little feet
  Of children bleeding along the street:

  "For parked-up honours that gainsay
        The right of way:
  For almsgiving through a door that is
  Not open enough for two friends to kiss:

  "For love of freedom which abates
        Beyond the Straits:
  For patriot virtue starved to vice on
  Self-praise, self-interest, and suspicion:

  "For an oligarchic parliament,
        And bribes well-meant.
  What curse to another land assign,
  When heavy-souled for the sins of mine?"

  "Therefore," the voice said, "shalt thou write
        My curse to-night.
  Because thou hast strength to see and hate
  A foul thing done _within_ thy gate."

  "Not so," I answered once again.
        "To curse, choose men.
  For I, a woman, have only known
  How the heart melts and the tears run down."

  "Therefore," the voice said, "shalt thou write
        My curse to-night.
  Some women weep and curse, I say
  (And no one marvels), night and day.

  "And thou shalt take their part to-night,
        Weep and write.
  A curse from the depths of womanhood
  Is very salt, and bitter, and good."

  So thus I wrote, and mourned indeed,
        What all may read.
  And thus, as was enjoined on me,
  I send it over the Western Sea.




THE CURSE.


  I.

  Because ye have broken your own chain
        With the strain
  Of brave men climbing a Nation's height,
  Yet thence bear down with brand and thong
  On souls of others,--for this wrong
        This is the curse. Write.

  Because yourselves are standing straight
        In the state
  Of Freedom's foremost acolyte,
  Yet keep calm footing all the time
  On writhing bond-slaves,--for this crime
        This is the curse. Write.

  Because ye prosper in God's name,
        With a claim
  To honour in the old world's sight,
  Yet do the fiend's work perfectly
  In strangling martyrs,--for this lie
        This is the curse. Write.

  II.

  Ye shall watch while kings conspire
  Round the people's smouldering fire,
    And, warm for your part,
  Shall never dare--O shame!
  To utter the thought into flame
    Which burns at your heart.
      This is the curse. Write.

  Ye shall watch while nations strive
  With the bloodhounds, die or survive,
    Drop faint from their jaws,
  Or throttle them backward to death;
  And only under your breath
    Shall favour the cause.
      This is the curse. Write.

  Ye shall watch while strong men draw
  The nets of feudal law
    To strangle the weak;
  And, counting the sin for a sin,
  Your soul shall be sadder within
    Than the word ye shall speak.
      This is the curse. Write.

  When good men are praying erect
  That Christ may avenge his elect
    And deliver the earth,
  The prayer in your ears, said low,
  Shall sound like the tramp of a foe
    That's driving you forth.
        This is the curse. Write.

  When wise men give you their praise,
  They shall pause in the heat of the phrase,
    As if carried too far.
  When ye boast your own charters kept true
  Ye shall blush; for the thing which ye do
    Derides what ye are.
        This is the curse. Write.

  When fools cast taunts at your gate,
  Your scorn ye shall somewhat abate
    As ye look o'er the wall;
  For your conscience, tradition, and name
  Explode with a deadlier blame
    Than the worst of them all.
        This is the curse. Write.

  Go, wherever ill deeds shall be done,
  Go, plant your flag in the sun
    Beside the ill-doers!
  And recoil from clenching the curse
  Of God's witnessing Universe
    With a curse of yours.
        THIS is the curse. Write.




LAST POEMS


ADVERTISEMENT.


These Poems are given as they occur on a list drawn up last June. A
few had already been printed in periodicals.

There is hardly such direct warrant for publishing the Translations;
which were only intended, many years ago, to accompany and explain
certain Engravings after ancient Gems, in the projected work of a
friend, by whose kindness they are now recovered: but as two of the
original series (the "Adonis" of Bion and "Song to the Rose" from
Achilles Tatius) have subsequently appeared, it is presumed that the
remainder may not improperly follow.

A single recent version is added.

LONDON: _February 1862_.


  TO "GRATEFUL FLORENCE,"
  TO THE MUNICIPALITY HER REPRESENTATIVE,
  AND TO TOMMASEO ITS SPOKESMAN,
  MOST GRATEFULLY.




LITTLE MATTIE.


  I.

  Dead! Thirteen a month ago!
  Short and narrow her life's walk;
  Lover's love she could not know
  Even by a dream or talk:
  Too young to be glad of youth,
  Missing honour, labour, rest,
  And the warmth of a babe's mouth
  At the blossom of her breast.
  Must you pity her for this
  And for all the loss it is,
  You, her mother, with wet face,
  Having had all in your case?

  II.

  Just so young but yesternight,
  Now she is as old as death.
  Meek, obedient in your sight,
    Gentle to a beck or breath
  Only on last Monday! Yours,
    Answering you like silver bells
  Lightly touched! An hour matures:
    You can teach her nothing else.
  She has seen the mystery hid
  Under Egypt's pyramid:
  By those eyelids pale and close
  Now she knows what Rhamses knows.

  III.

  Cross her quiet hands, and smooth
    Down her patient locks of silk,
  Cold and passive as in truth
    You your fingers in spilt milk
  Drew along a marble floor;
    But her lips you cannot wring
  Into saying a word more,
    "Yes," or "No," or such a thing:
  Though you call and beg and wreak
  Half your soul out in a shriek,
  She will lie there in default
  And most innocent revolt.

  IV.

  Ay, and if she spoke, maybe
    She would answer, like the Son,
  "What is now 'twixt thee and me?"
    Dreadful answer! better none.
  Yours on Monday, God's to-day!
    Yours, your child, your blood, your heart,
  Called ... you called her, did you say,
    "Little Mattie" for your part?
  Now already it sounds strange,
  And you wonder, in this change,
  What He calls His angel-creature,
  Higher up than you can reach her.

  V.

  'T was a green and easy world
    As she took it; room to play
  (Though one's hair might get uncurled
    At the far end of the day).
  What she suffered she shook off
    In the sunshine; what she sinned
  She could pray on high, enough
    To keep safe above the wind.
  If reproved by God or you,
  'T was to better her, she knew;
  And if crossed, she gathered still
  'T was to cross out something ill.

  VI.

  You, you had the right, you thought,
    To survey her with sweet scorn,
  Poor gay child, who had not caught
    Yet the octave-stretch forlorn
  Of your larger wisdom! Nay,
    Now your places are changed so,
  In that same superior way
    She regards you dull and low
  As you did herself exempt
  From life's sorrows. Grand contempt
  Of the spirits risen awhile,
  Who look back with such a smile!

  VII.

  There's the sting of't. That, I think,
    Hurts the most a thousandfold!
  To feel sudden, at a wink,
    Some dear child we used to scold,
  Praise, love both ways, kiss and tease,
    Teach and tumble as our own,
  All its curls about our knees,
    Rise up suddenly full-grown.
  Who could wonder such a sight
  Made a woman mad outright?
  Show me Michael with the sword
  Rather than such angels, Lord!




A FALSE STEP.


  I.

  Sweet, thou hast trod on a heart.
    Pass; there's a world full of men;
  And women as fair as thou art
    Must do such things now and then.

  II.

  Thou only hast stepped unaware,--
    Malice, not one can impute;
  And why should a heart have been there
    In the way of a fair woman's foot?

  III.

  It was not a stone that could trip,
    Nor was it a thorn that could rend:
  Put up thy proud under-lip!
    'T was merely the heart of a friend.

  IV.

  And yet peradventure one day
    Thou, sitting alone at the glass,
  Remarking the bloom gone away,
    Where the smile in its dimplement was,

  V.

  And seeking around thee in vain
    From hundreds who flattered before,
  Such a word as "Oh, not in the main
    Do I hold thee less precious, but more!"...

  VI.

  Thou'lt sigh, very like, on thy part,
    "Of all I have known or can know,
  I wish I had only that Heart
    I trod upon ages ago!"




VOID IN LAW.


  I.

  Sleep, little babe, on my knee,
    Sleep, for the midnight is chill,
  And the moon has died out in the tree,
    And the great human world goeth ill.
  Sleep, for the wicked agree:
    Sleep, let them do as they will.
          Sleep.

  II.

  Sleep, thou hast drawn from my breast
    The last drop of milk that was good;
  And now, in a dream, suck the rest,
    Lest the real should trouble thy blood.
  Suck, little lips dispossessed,
    As we kiss in the air whom we would.
          Sleep.

  III.

  O lips of thy father! the same,
    So like! Very deeply they swore
  When he gave me his ring and his name,
    To take back, I imagined, no more!
  And now is all changed like a game,
    Though the old cards are used as of yore?
          Sleep.

  IV.

  "Void in law," said the Courts. Something wrong
    In the forms? Yet, "Till death part us two,
  I, James, take thee, Jessie," was strong,
    And ONE witness competent. True
  Such a marriage was worth an old song,
    Heard in Heaven though, as plain as the New.
          Sleep.

  V.

  Sleep, little child, his and mine!
    Her throat has the antelope curve,
  And her cheek just the colour and line
    Which fade not before him nor swerve:
  Yet _she_ has no child!--the divine
    Seal of right upon loves that deserve.
          Sleep.

  VI.

  My child! though the world take her part,
    Saying "She was the woman to choose;
  He had eyes, was a man in his heart,"--
    We twain the decision refuse:
  We ... weak as I am, as thou art, ...
    Cling on to him, never to loose.
          Sleep.

  VII.

  He thinks that, when done with this place,
    All's ended? he'll new-stamp the ore?
  Yes, Caesar's--but not in our case.
    Let him learn we are waiting before
  The grave's mouth, the heaven's gate, God's face
    With implacable love evermore.
          Sleep.

  VIII.

  He's ours, though he kissed her but now,
    He's ours, though she kissed in reply:
  He's ours, though himself disavow,
    And God's universe favour the lie;
  Ours to claim, ours to clasp, ours below,
    Ours above, ... if we live, if we die.
          Sleep.

  IX.

  Ah baby, my baby, too rough
    Is my lullaby? What have I said?
  Sleep! When I've wept long enough
    I shall learn to weep softly instead,
  And piece with some alien stuff
    My heart to lie smooth for thy head.
          Sleep.

  X.

  Two souls met upon thee, my sweet;
    Two loves led thee out to the sun:
  Alas, pretty hands, pretty feet,
    If the one who remains (only one)
  Set her grief at thee, turned in a heat
    To thine enemy,--were it well done?
          Sleep.

  XI.

  May He of the manger stand near
    And love thee! An infant He came
  To His own who rejected Him here,
    But the Magi brought gifts all the same.
  _I_ hurry the cross on my Dear!
    _My_ gifts are the griefs I declaim!
          Sleep.




LORD WALTER'S WIFE.


  I.

  "But why do you go?" said the lady, while both sat under the yew,
  And her eyes were alive in their depth, as the kraken beneath the
        sea-blue.

  II.

  "Because I fear you," he answered;--"because you are far too fair,
  And able to strangle my soul in a mesh of your gold-coloured hair."

  III.

  "Oh, that," she said, "is no reason! Such knots are quickly undone,
  And too much beauty, I reckon, is nothing but too much sun."

  IV.

  "Yet farewell so," he answered;--"the sun-stroke's fatal at times.
  I value your husband, Lord Walter, whose gallop rings still from the
        limes."

  V.

  "Oh, that," she said, "is no reason. You smell a rose through a
        fence:
  If two should smell it, what matter? who grumbles, and where's the
        pretence?"

  VI.

  "But I," he replied, "have promised another, when love was free,
  To love her alone, alone, who alone and afar loves me."

  VII.

  "Why, that," she said, "is no reason. Love's always free, I am
        told.
  Will you vow to be safe from the headache on Tuesday, and think it
        will hold?"

  VIII.

  "But you," he replied, "have a daughter, a young little child, who
        was laid
  In your lap to be pure; so I leave you: the angels would make me
        afraid."

  IX.

  "Oh, that," she said, "is no reason. The angels keep out of the
        way;
  And Dora, the child, observes nothing, although you should please me
        and stay."

  X.

  At which he rose up in his anger,--"Why, now, you no longer are
        fair!
  Why, now, you no longer are fatal, but ugly and hateful, I swear."

  XI.

  At which she laughed out in her scorn: "These men! Oh, these men
        overnice,
  Who are shocked if a colour not virtuous is frankly put on by a
        vice."

  XII.

  Her eyes blazed upon him--"And _you_! You bring us your vices so
        near
  That we smell them! You think in our presence a thought 't would
        defame us to hear!

  XIII.

  "What reason had you, and what right,--I appeal to your soul from my
        life,--
  To find me too fair as a woman? Why, sir, I am pure, and a wife.

  XIV.

  "Is the day-star too fair up above you? It burns you not. Dare you
        imply
  I brushed you more close than the star does, when Walter had set me
        as high?

  XV.

  "If a man finds a woman too fair, he means simply adapted too much
  To uses unlawful and fatal. The praise!--shall I thank you for
        such?

  XVI.

  "Too fair?--not unless you misuse us! and surely if, once in a
        while,
  You attain to it, straightway you call us no longer too fair, but
        too vile.

  XVII.

  "A moment,--I pray your attention!--I have a poor word in my head
  I must utter, though womanly custom would set it down better
        unsaid.

  XVIII.

  "You grew, sir, pale to impertinence, once when I showed you a
        ring.
  You kissed my fan when I dropped it. No matter!--I've broken the
        thing.

  XIX.

  "You did me the honour, perhaps, to be moved at my side now and
        then
  In the senses--a vice, I have heard, which is common to beasts and
        some men.

  XX.

  "Love's a virtue for heroes!--as white as the snow on high hills,
  And immortal as every great soul is that struggles, endures, and
        fulfils.

  XXI.

  "I love my Walter profoundly,--you, Maude, though you faltered a
        week,
  For the sake of ... what was it--an eyebrow? or, less still, a mole
        on a cheek?

  XXII.

  "And since, when all's said, you're too noble to stoop to the
        frivolous cant
  About crimes irresistible, virtues that swindle, betray and
        supplant,

  XXIII.

  "I determined to prove to yourself that, whate'er you might dream or
        avow
  By illusion, you wanted precisely no more of me than you have now.

  XXIV.

  "There! Look me full in the face!--in the face. Understand, if you
        can,
  That the eyes of such women as I am are clean as the palm of a man.

  XXV.

  "Drop his hand, you insult him. Avoid us for fear we should cost you
        a scar--
  You take us for harlots, I tell you, and not for the women we are.

  XXVI.

  "You wronged me: but then I considered ... there's Walter! And so at
        the end
  I vowed that he should not be mulcted, by me, in the hand of a
        friend.

  XXVII.

  "Have I hurt you indeed? We are quits then. Nay, friend of my
        Walter, be mine!
  Come, Dora, my darling, my angel, and help me to ask him to dine."




BIANCA AMONG THE NIGHTINGALES.


  I.

  The cypress stood up like a church
    That night we felt our love would hold,
  And saintly moonlight seemed to search
    And wash the whole world clean as gold;
  The olives crystallized the vales'
    Broad slopes until the hills grew strong:
  The fire-flies and the nightingales
    Throbbed each to either, flame and song.
  The nightingales, the nightingales!

  II.

  Upon the angle of its shade
    The cypress stood, self-balanced high;
  Half up, half down, as double-made,
    Along the ground, against the sky;
  And _we_, too! from such soul-height went
    Such leaps of blood, so blindly driven,
  We scarce knew if our nature meant
    Most passionate earth or intense heaven
  The nightingales, the nightingales!

  III.

  We paled with love, we shook with love,
    We kissed so close we could not vow;
  Till Giulio whispered "Sweet, above
    God's Ever guaranties this Now."
  And through his words the nightingales
    Drove straight and full their long clear call,
  Like arrows through heroic mails,
    And love was awful in it all.
  The nightingales, the nightingales!

  IV.

  O cold white moonlight of the north,
    Refresh these pulses, quench this hell!
  O coverture of death drawn forth
    Across this garden-chamber ... well!
  But what have nightingales to do
    In gloomy England, called the free ...
  (Yes, free to die in!...) when we two
    Are sundered, singing still to me?
  And still they sing, the nightingales!

  V.

  I think I hear him, how he cried
    "My own soul's life!" between their notes.
  Each man has but one soul supplied,
    And that's immortal. Though his throat's
  On fire with passion now, to _her_
    He can't say what to me he said!
  And yet he moves her, they aver.
    The nightingales sing through my head,--
  The nightingales, the nightingales!

  VI.

  He says to her what moves her most.
    He would not name his soul within
  Her hearing,--rather pays her cost
    With praises to her lips and chin.
  Man has but one soul, 't is ordained,
    And each soul but one love, I add;
  Yet souls are damned and love's profaned;
    These nightingales will sing me mad!
  The nightingales, the nightingales!

  VII.

  I marvel how the birds can sing.
    There's little difference, in their view,
  Betwixt our Tuscan trees that spring
    As vital flames into the blue,
  And dull round blots of foliage meant,
    Like saturated sponges here,
  To suck the fogs up. As content
    Is he too in this land, 't is clear.
  And still they sing, the nightingales.

  VIII.

  My native Florence! dear, forgone!
    I see across the Alpine ridge
  How the last feast-day of Saint John
    Shot rockets from Carraia bridge.
  The luminous city, tall with fire,
    Trod deep down in that river of ours,
  While many a boat with lamp and choir
    Skimmed birdlike over glittering towers.
  I will not hear these nightingales.

  IX.

  I seem to float, _we_ seem to float
    Down Arno's stream in festive guise;
  A boat strikes flame into our boat,
    And up that lady seems to rise
  As then she rose. The shock had flashed
    A vision on us! What a head,
  What leaping eyeballs!--beauty dashed
    To splendour by a sudden dread.
  And still they sing, the nightingales.

  X.

  Too bold to sin, too weak to die;
    Such women are so. As for me,
  I would we had drowned there, he and I,
    That moment, loving perfectly.
  He had not caught her with her loosed
    Gold ringlets ... rarer in the south ...
  Nor heard the "Grazie tanto" bruised
    To sweetness by her English mouth.
  And still they sing, the nightingales.

  XI.

  She had not reached him at my heart
    With her fine tongue, as snakes indeed
  Kill flies; nor had I, for my part,
    Yearned after, in my desperate need,
  And followed him as he did her
    To coasts left bitter by the tide,
  Whose very nightingales, elsewhere
    Delighting, torture and deride!
  For still they sing, the nightingales.

  XII.

  A worthless woman; mere cold clay
    As all false things are: but so fair,
  She takes the breath of men away
    Who gaze upon her unaware.
  I would not play her larcenous tricks
    To have her looks! She lied and stole,
  And spat into my love's pure pyx
    The rank saliva of her soul.
  And still they sing, the nightingales.

  XIII.

  I would not for her white and pink,
    Though such he likes--her grace of limb,
  Though such he has praised--nor yet, I think.
    For life itself, though spent with him,
  Commit such sacrilege, affront
    God's nature which is love, intrude
  'Twixt two affianced souls, and hunt
    Like spiders, in the altar's wood.
  I cannot bear these nightingales.

  XIV.

  If she chose sin, some gentler guise
    She might have sinned in, so it seems:
  She might have pricked out both my eyes,
    And I still seen him in my dreams!
  --Or drugged me in my soup or wine,
    Nor left me angry afterward:
  To die here with his hand in mine,
    His breath upon me, were not hard.
  (Our Lady hush these nightingales!)

  XV.

  But set a springe for _him_, "mio ben,"
    My only good, my first last love!--
  Though Christ knows well what sin is, when
    He sees some things done they must move
  Himself to wonder. Let her pass.
    I think of her by night and day.
  Must _I_ too join her ... out, alas!...
    With Giulio, in each word I say?
  And evermore the nightingales!

  XVI.

  Giulio, my Giulio!--sing they so,
    And you be silent? Do I speak,
  And you not hear? An arm you throw
    Round someone, and I feel so weak?
  --Oh, owl-like birds! They sing for spite,
    They sing for hate, they sing for doom,
  They'll sing through death who sing through night,
    They'll sing and stun me in the tomb--
  The nightingales, the nightingales!




MY KATE.


  I.

  She was not as pretty as women I know,
  And yet all your best made of sunshine and snow
  Drop to shade, melt to nought in the long-trodden ways,
  While she's still remembered on warm and cold days--
                                          My Kate.

  II.

  Her air had a meaning, her movements a grace;
  You turned from the fairest to gaze on her face:
  And when you had once seen her forehead and mouth,
  You saw as distinctly her soul and her truth--
                                          My Kate.

  III.

  Such a blue inner light from her eyelids outbroke,
  You looked at her silence and fancied she spoke:
  When she did, so peculiar yet soft was the tone,
  Though the loudest spoke also, you heard her alone--
                                          My Kate.

  IV.

  I doubt if she said to you much that could act
  As a thought or suggestion: she did not attract
  In the sense of the brilliant or wise: I infer
  'T was her thinking of others made you think of her--
                                          My Kate.

  V.

  She never found fault with you, never implied
  Your wrong by her right; and yet men at her side
  Grew nobler, girls purer, as through the whole town
  The children were gladder that pulled at her gown--
                                          My Kate.

  VI.

  None knelt at her feet confessed lovers in thrall;
  They knelt more to God than they used,--that was all:
  If you praised her as charming, some asked what you meant,
  But the charm of her presence was felt when she went--
                                          My Kate.

  VII.

  The weak and the gentle, the ribald and rude,
  She took as she found them, and did them all good;
  It always was so with her--see what you have!
  She has made the grass greener even here ... with her grave--
                                          My Kate.

  VIII.

  My dear one!--when thou wast alive with the rest,
  I held thee the sweetest and loved thee the best:
  And now thou art dead, shall I not take thy part
  As thy smiles used to do for thyself, my sweet Heart--
                                          My Kate?




A SONG FOR THE RAGGED SCHOOL OF LONDON.

WRITTEN IN ROME.


  I.

  I am listening here in Rome.
    "England's strong," say many speakers,
  "If she winks, the Czar must come,
    Prow and topsail, to the breakers."

  II.

  "England's rich in coal and oak,"
    Adds a Roman, getting moody;
  "If she shakes a travelling cloak,
    Down our Appian roll the scudi."

  III.

  "England's righteous," they rejoin:
    "Who shall grudge her exaltations
  When her wealth of golden coin
    Works the welfare of the nations?"

  IV.

  I am listening here in Rome.
    Over Alps a voice is sweeping--
  "England's cruel, save us some
    Of these victims in her keeping!"

  V.

  As the cry beneath the wheel
    Of an old triumphant Roman
  Cleft the people's shouts like steel,
    While the show was spoilt for no man,

  VI.

  Comes that voice. Let others shout,
    Other poets praise my land here:
  I am sadly sitting out,
    Praying, "God forgive her grandeur."

  VII.

  Shall we boast of empire, where
    Time with ruin sits commissioned?
  In God's liberal blue air
    Peter's dome itself looks wizened;

  VIII.

  And the mountains, in disdain,
    Gather back their lights of opal
  From the dumb despondent plain
    Heaped with jawbones of a people.

  IX.

  Lordly English, think it o'er,
    Caesar's doing is all undone!
  You have cannons on your shore,
    And free Parliaments in London;

  X.

  Princes' parks, and merchants' homes,
    Tents for soldiers, ships for seamen,--
  Ay, but ruins worse than Rome's
    In your pauper men and women.

  XI.

  Women leering through the gas
    (Just such bosoms used to nurse you),
  Men, turned wolves by famine--pass!
    Those can speak themselves, and curse you.

  XII.

  But these others--children small,
    Spilt like blots about the city,
  Quay, and street, and palace-wall--
    Take them up into your pity!

  XIII.

  Ragged children with bare feet,
    Whom the angels in white raiment
  Know the names of, to repeat
    When they come on you for payment.

  XIV.

  Ragged children, hungry-eyed,
    Huddled up out of the coldness
  On your doorsteps, side by side,
    Till your footman damns their boldness.

  XV.

  In the alleys, in the squares,
    Begging, lying little rebels;
  In the noisy thoroughfares,
    Struggling on with piteous trebles.

  XVI.

  Patient children--think what pain
    Makes a young child patient--ponder!
  Wronged too commonly to strain
    After right, or wish, or wonder.

  XVII.

  Wicked children, with peaked chins,
    And old foreheads! there are many
  With no pleasures except sins,
    Gambling with a stolen penny.

  XVIII.

  Sickly children, that whine low
    To themselves and not their mothers,
  From mere habit,--never so
    Hoping help or care from others.

  XIX.

  Healthy children, with those blue
    English eyes, fresh from their Maker,
  Fierce and ravenous, staring through
    At the brown loaves of the baker.

  XX.

  I am listening here in Rome,
    And the Romans are confessing,
  "English children pass in bloom
    All the prettiest made for blessing.

  XXI.

  "_Angli angeli!_" (resumed
    From the mediaeval story)
  "Such rose angelhoods, emplumed
    In such ringlets of pure glory!"

  XXII.

  Can we smooth down the bright hair,
    O my sisters, calm, unthrilled in
  Our heart's pulses? Can we bear
    The sweet looks of our own children,

  XXIII.

  While those others, lean and small,
    Scurf and mildew of the city,
  Spot our streets, convict us all
    Till we take them into pity?

  XXIV.

  "Is it our fault?" you reply,
    "When, throughout civilization,
  Every nation's empery
    Is asserted by starvation?

  XXV.

  "All these mouths we cannot feed,
    And we cannot clothe these bodies."
  Well, if man's so hard indeed,
    Let them learn at least what God is!

  XXVI.

  Little outcasts from life's fold,
    The grave's hope they may be joined in
  By Christ's covenant consoled
    For our social contract's grinding.

  XXVII.

  If no better can be done,
    Let us do but this,--endeavour
  That the sun behind the sun
    Shine upon them while they shiver!

  XXVIII.

  On the dismal London flags,
    Through the cruel social juggle,
  Put a thought beneath their rags
    To ennoble the heart's struggle.

  XXIX.

  O my sisters, not so much
    Are we asked for--not a blossom
  From our children's nosegay, such
  As we gave it from our bosom,--

  XXX.

  Not the milk left in their cup,
    Not the lamp while they are sleeping,
  Not the little cloak hung up
    While the coat's in daily keeping,--

  XXXI.

  But a place in RAGGED SCHOOLS,
    Where the outcasts may to-morrow
  Learn by gentle words and rules
    Just the uses of their sorrow.

  XXXII.

  O my sisters! children small,
    Blue-eyed, wailing through the city--
  Our own babes cry in them all:
    Let us take them into pity.




MAY'S LOVE.

[Illustration: Handwritten Copy of Poem]


  I.

  You love all, you say,
    Round, beneath, above me:
  Find me then some way
    Better than to love me,
  Me, too, dearest May!

  II.

  O world-kissing eyes
    Which the blue heavens melt to;
  I, sad, overwise,
    Loathe the sweet looks dealt to
  All things--men and flies.

  III.

  You love all, you say:
    Therefore, Dear, abate me
  Just your love, I pray!
    Shut your eyes and hate me--
  Only _me_--fair May!




AMY'S CRUELTY.


  I.

  Fair Amy of the terraced house,
    Assist me to discover
  Why you who would not hurt a mouse
    Can torture so your lover.

  II.

  You give your coffee to the cat,
    You stroke the dog for coming,
  And all your face grows kinder at
    The little brown bee's humming.

  III.

  But when _he_ haunts your door ... the town
    Marks coming and marks going ...
  You seem to have stitched your eyelids down
    To that long piece of sewing!

  IV.

  You never give a look, not you,
    Nor drop him a "Good morning,"
  To keep his long day warm and blue,
    So fretted by your scorning.

  V.

  She shook her head--"The mouse and bee
    For crumb or flower will linger:
  The dog is happy at my knee,
    The cat purrs at my finger.

  VI.

  "But _he_ ... to _him_, the least thing given
    Means great things at a distance;
  He wants my world, my sun, my heaven,
    Soul, body, whole existence.

  VII.

  "They say love gives as well as takes;
    But I'm a simple maiden,--
  My mother's first smile when she wakes
    I still have smiled and prayed in.

  VIII.

  "I only know my mother's love
    Which gives all and asks nothing;
  And this new loving sets the groove
    Too much the way of loathing.

  IX.

  "Unless he gives me all in change,
    I forfeit all things by him:
  The risk is terrible and strange--
    I tremble, doubt, ... deny him.

  X.

  "He's sweetest friend or hardest foe,
    Best angel or worst devil;
  I either hate or ... love him so,
    I can't be merely civil!

  XI.

  "You trust a woman who puts forth
    Her blossoms thick as summer's?
  You think she dreams what love is worth,
    Who casts it to new-comers?

  XII.

  "Such love's a cowslip-ball to fling,
    A moment's pretty pastime;
  _I_ give ... all me, if anything,
    The first time and the last time.

  XIII.

  "Dear neighbour of the trellised house,
    A man should murmur never,
  Though treated worse than dog and mouse,
    Till doated on for ever!"




MY HEART AND I.


  I.

  Enough! we're tired, my heart and I.
    We sit beside the headstone thus,
    And wish that name were carved for us.
  The moss reprints more tenderly
    The hard types of the mason's knife,
    As heaven's sweet life renews earth's life
  With which we're tired, my heart and I.

  II.

  You see we're tired, my heart and I.
    We dealt with books, we trusted men,
    And in our own blood drenched the pen,
  As if such colours could not fly.
    We walked too straight for fortune's end,
    We loved too true to keep a friend;
  At last we're tired, my heart and I.

  III.

  How tired we feel, my heart and I!
    We seem of no use in the world;
    Our fancies hang grey and uncurled
  About men's eyes indifferently;
    Our voice which thrilled you so, will let
    You sleep; our tears are only wet:
  What do we here, my heart and I?

  IV.

  So tired, so tired, my heart and I!
    It was not thus in that old time
    When Ralph sat with me 'neath the lime
  To watch the sunset from the sky.
    "Dear love, you're looking tired," he said;
    I, smiling at him, shook my head:
  'T is now we're tired, my heart and I.

  V.

  So tired, so tired, my heart and I!
    Though now none takes me on his arm
    To fold me close and kiss me warm
  Till each quick breath end in a sigh
    Of happy languor. Now, alone,
    We lean upon this graveyard stone,
  Uncheered, unkissed, my heart and I.

  VI.

  Tired out we are, my heart and I.
    Suppose the world brought diadems
    To tempt us, crusted with loose gems
  Of powers and pleasures? Let it try.
    We scarcely care to look at even
    A pretty child, or God's blue heaven,
  We feel so tired, my heart and I.

  VII.

  Yet who complains? My heart and I?
    In this abundant earth no doubt
    Is little room for things worn out:
  Disdain them, break them, throw them by!
    And if before the days grew rough
    We _once_ were loved, used,--well enough,
  I think, we've fared, my heart and I.




THE BEST THING IN THE WORLD.


  What's the best thing in the world?
  June-rose, by May-dew impearled;
  Sweet south-wind, that means no rain;
  Truth, not cruel to a friend;
  Pleasure, not in haste to end;
  Beauty, not self-decked and curled
  Till its pride is over-plain;
  Light, that never makes you wink;
  Memory, that gives no pain;
  Love, when, _so_, you're loved again.
  What's the best thing in the world?
  --Something out of it, I think.




WHERE'S AGNES?


  I.

  Nay, if I had come back so,
    And found her dead in her grave,
  And if a friend I know
    Had said, "Be strong, nor rave:
  She lies there, dead below:

  II.

  "I saw her, I who speak,
    White, stiff, the face one blank:
  The blue shade came to her cheek
    Before they nailed the plank,
  For she had been dead a week."

  III.

  Why, if he had spoken so,
    I might have believed the thing,
  Although her look, although
    Her step, laugh, voice's ring
  Lived in me still as they do.

  IV.

  But dead that other way,
    Corrupted thus and lost?
  That sort of worm in the clay?
    I cannot count the cost,
  That I should rise and pay.

  V.

  My Agnes false? such shame?
    She? Rather be it said
  That the pure saint of her name
    Has stood there in her stead,
  And tricked you to this blame.

  VI.

  Her very gown, her cloak
    Fell chastely: no disguise,
  But expression! while she broke
    With her clear grey morning-eyes
  Full upon me and then spoke.

  VII.

  She wore her hair away
    From her forehead,--like a cloud
  Which a little wind in May
    Peels off finely: disallowed
  Though bright enough to stay.

  VIII.

  For the heavens must have the place
    To themselves, to use and shine in,
  As her soul would have her face
    To press through upon mine, in
  That orb of angel grace.

  IX.

  Had she any fault at all,
    'T was having none, I thought too--
  There seemed a sort of thrall;
    As she felt her shadow ought to
  Fall straight upon the wall.

  X.

  Her sweetness strained the sense
    Of common life and duty;
  And every day's expense
    Of moving in such beauty
  Required, almost, defence.

  XI.

  What good, I thought, is done
    By such sweet things, if any?
  This world smells ill i' the sun
    Though the garden-flowers are many,--
  _She_ is only one.

  XII.

  Can a voice so low and soft
    Take open actual part
  With Right,--maintain aloft
    Pure truth in life or art,
  Vexed always, wounded oft?--

  XIII.

  _She_ fit, with that fair pose
    Which melts from curve to curve,
  To stand, run, work with those
    Who wrestle and deserve,
  And speak plain without glose?

  XIV.

  But I turned round on my fear
    Defiant, disagreeing--
  What if God has set her here
    Less for action than for Being?--
  For the eye and for the ear.

  XV.

  Just to show what beauty may,
    Just to prove what music can,--
  And then to die away
    From the presence of a man,
  Who shall learn, henceforth, to pray?

  XVI.

  As a door, left half ajar
    In heaven, would make him think
  How heavenly-different are
    Things glanced at through the chink,
  Till he pined from near to far.

  XVII.

  That door could lead to hell?
    That shining merely meant
  Damnation? What! She fell
    Like a woman, who was sent
  Like an angel, by a spell?

  XVIII.

  She, who scarcely trod the earth,
    Turned mere dirt? My Agnes,--mine!
  Called so! felt of too much worth
    To be used so! too divine
  To be breathed near, and so forth!

  XIX.

  Why, I dared not name a sin
    In her presence: I went round,
  Clipped its name and shut it in
    Some mysterious crystal sound,--
  Changed the dagger for the pin.

  XX.

  Now you name herself _that word_?
    O my Agnes! O my saint!
  Then the great joys of the Lord
    Do not last? Then all this paint
  Runs off nature? leaves a board?

  XXI.

  Who's dead here? No, not she:
    Rather I! or whence this damp
  Cold corruption's misery?
    While my very mourners stamp
  Closer in the clods on me.

  XXII.

  And my mouth is full of dust
    Till I cannot speak and curse--
  Speak and damn him ... "Blame's unjust"?
    Sin blots out the universe,
  All because she would and must?

  XXIII.

  She, my white rose, dropping off
    The high rose-tree branch! and not
  That the night-wind blew too rough,
    Or the noon-sun burnt too hot,
  But, that being a rose--'t was enough!

  XXIV.

  Then henceforth may earth grow trees!
    No more roses!--hard straight lines
  To score lies out! none of these
    Fluctuant curves, but firs and pines,
  Poplars, cedars, cypresses!




END OF THE FOURTH VOLUME.


                               PRINTED BY
                SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
                                 LONDON

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber Notes

Archaic and variable spelling and hyphenation are preserved.

Passages in italics indicated by _underscores_.

Greek transliterations indicated by ~tildes~.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of Elizabeth
Barrett Browning, Volume IV, by Elizabeth Barrett Browning

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORKS OF E.B. BROWNING, VOL IV ***

***** This file should be named 31015-8.txt or 31015-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/0/1/31015/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Henry Craig, Katherine Ward
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
