The Project Gutenberg EBook of The George Sand-Gustave Flaubert Letters
Translated by A.L. McKensie

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: The George Sand-Gustave Flaubert Letters

Author: George Sand, Gustave Flaubert
        Translated by A.L. McKensie

Release Date: February, 2004 [EBook #5115]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 1, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SAND-FLAUBERT LETTERS ***




Produced by Steve Harris, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





The George Sand-Gustave Flaubert Letters

Translated by A.L. McKenzie (1921)

Introduction by Stuart Sherman





PREFATORY NOTE

This translation of the correspondence between George Sand and
Gustave Flaubert was undertaken in consequence of a suggestion by
Professor Stuart P. Sherman. The translator desires to acknowledge
valuable criticism given by Professor Sherman, Ruth M. Sherman, and
Professor Kenneth McKenzie, all of whom have generously assisted in
revising the manuscript.

A. L. McKenzie



INTRODUCTION

The correspondence of George Sand and Gustave Flaubert, if
approached merely as a chapter in the biographies of these heroes of
nineteenth century letters, is sufficiently rewarding. In a
relationship extending over twelve years, including the trying
period of the Franco-Prussian War and the Commune, these
extraordinary personalities disclose the aspects of their diverse
natures which are best worth the remembrance of posterity. However
her passionate and erratic youth may have captivated our
grandfathers, George Sand in the mellow autumn of her life is for us
at her most attractive phase. The storms and anguish and hazardous
adventures that attended the defiant unfolding of her spirit are
over. In her final retreat at Nohant, surrounded by her affectionate
children and grandchildren, diligently writing, botanizing, bathing
in her little river, visited by her friends and undistracted by the
fiery lovers of the old time, she shows an unguessed wealth of
maternal virtue, swift, comprehending sympathy, fortitude, sunny
resignation, and a goodness of heart that has ripened into wisdom.
For Flaubert, too, though he was seventeen years her junior, the
flamboyance of youth was long since past; in 1862, when the
correspondence begins, he was firmly settled, a shy, proud, grumpy
toiling hermit of forty, in his family seat at Croisset, beginning
his seven years' labor at L'Education Sentimentale, master of his
art, hardening in his convictions, and conscious of increasing
estrangement from the spirit of his age. He, with his craving for
sympathy, and she, with her inexhaustible supply of it, meet; he
pours out his bitterness, she her consolation; and so with equal
candor of self-revelation they beautifully draw out and strengthen
each the other's characteristics, and help one another grow old.

But there is more in these letters than a satisfaction for the
biographical appetite, which, indeed, finds ITS account rather in
the earlier chapters of the correspondents' history. What impresses
us here is the banquet spread for the reflective and critical
faculties in this intercourse of natural antagonists. As M. Faguet
observes in a striking paragraph of his study of Flaubert:

"It is a curious thing, which does honor to them both, that Flaubert
and George Sand should have become loving friends towards the end of
their lives. At the beginning, Flaubert might have been looked upon
by George Sand as a furious enemy. Emma [Madame Bovary] is George
Sand's heroine with all the poetry turned into ridicule. Flaubert
seems to say in every page of his work: 'Do you want to know what is
the real Valentine, the real Indiana, the real Lelia? Here she is,
it is Emma Roualt.' 'And do you want to know what becomes of a woman
whose education has consisted in George Sand's books? Here she is,
Emma Roualt.' So that the terrible mocker of the bourgeois has
written a book which is directly inspired by the spirit of the 1840
bourgeois. Their recriminations against romanticism 'which
rehabilitates and poetises the courtesan,' against George Sand, the
Muse of Adultery, are to be found in acts and facts in Madame
Bovary."

Now, the largest interest of this correspondence depends precisely
upon the continuance, beneath an affectionate personal relationship,
of a fundamental antagonism of interests and beliefs, resolutely
maintained on both sides. George Sand, with her lifelong passion for
propaganda and reformation, labors earnestly to bring Flaubert to
her point of view, to remould him nearer to her heart's desire. He,
with a playful deference to the sex and years of his friend,
addresses her in his letters as "Dear Master." Yet in the essentials
of the conflict, though she never gives over her effort, he never
budges a jot; he has taken his ground, and in his last unfinished
work, Bouvard and Pecuchet, he dies stubbornly fortifying his
position. To the last she speaks from a temperament lyrical,
sanguine, imaginative, optimistic and sympathetic; he from a
temperament dramatic, melancholy, observing, cynical, and satirical.
She insists upon natural goodness; he, upon innate depravity. She
urges her faith in social regeneration; he vents his splenetic
contempt for the mob. Through all the successive shocks of
disillusioning experience, she expects the renovation of humanity by
some religious, some semi-mystical, amelioration of its heart; he
grimly concedes the greater part of humanity to the devil, and can
see no escape for the remnant save in science and aristocratic
organization. For her, finally, the literary art is an instrument of
social salvation--it is her means of touching the world with her
ideals, her love, her aspiration; for him the literary art is the
avenue of escape from the meaningless chaos of existence--it is his
subtly critical condemnation of the world.

The origins of these unreconciled antipathies lie deep beneath the
personal relationship of George Sand and Gustave Flaubert; lie deep
beneath their successors, who with more or less of amenity in their
manners are still debating the same questions today. The main
currents of the nineteenth century, with fluent and refluent tides,
clash beneath the controversy; and as soon as one hears its "long
withdrawing roar," and thinks it is dying away, and is become a part
of ancient history, it begins again, and will be heard, no doubt, by
the last man as a solemn accompaniment to his final contention with
his last adversary.

George Sand was, on the whole, a natural and filial daughter of the
French Revolution. The royal blood which she received from her
father's line mingled in her veins with that of the Parisian
milliner, her mother, and predestined her for a leveller by
preparing in her an instinctive ground of revolt against all those
inherited prejudices which divided the families of her parents. As a
young girl wildly romping with the peasant children at Nohant she
discovered a joy in untrammeled rural life which was only to
increase with years. At the proper age for beginning to fashion a
conventional young lady, the hoyden was put in a convent, where she
underwent some exalting religious experiences; and in 1822 she was
assigned to her place in the "established social order" by her
marriage at seventeen to M. Dudevant. After a few years of rather
humdrum domestic life in the country, she became aware that this
gentleman, her husband, was behaving as we used to be taught that
all French husbands ultimately behave; he was, in fact, turning from
her to her maids. The young couple had never been strongly united--
the impetuous dreamy girl and her coarse hunting mate; and they had
grown wide apart. She should, of course, have adjusted herself
quietly to the altered situation and have kept up appearances. But
this young wife had gradually become an "intellectual"; she had been
reading philosophy and poetry; she was saturated with the writings
of Rousseau, of Chateaubriand, of Byron. None of the spiritual
masters of her generation counselled acquiescence in servitude or
silence in misery. Every eloquent tongue of the time-spirit urged
self-expression and revolt. And she, obedient to the deepest
impulses of her blood and her time, revolted.

At the period when Madame Dudevant withdrew her neck from the
conjugal yoke and plunged into her literary career in Paris, the
doctrine that men are created for freedom, equality and fraternity
was already somewhat hackneyed. She, with an impetus from her own
private fortunes, was to give the doctrine a recrudescence of
interest by resolutely applying it to the status of women. We cannot
follow her in detail from the point where she abandons the domestic
sewing-basket to reappear smoking black cigars in the Latin Quarter.
We find her, at about 1831, entering into competition with the
brilliant literary generation of Balzac, Hugo, Alfred de Musset,
Merimee, Stendhal, and Sainte-Beuve. To signalize her equality with
her brothers in talent, she adopts male attire: "I had a sentry-box
coat made, of rough grey cloth, with trousers and waist-coat to
match. With a grey hat and a huge cravat of woolen material, I
looked exactly like a first-year student." In the freedom of this
rather unalluring garb she entered into relations Platonic,
fraternal, or tempestuously passionate with perhaps the most
distinguished series of friends and lovers that ever fluttered about
one flame. There was Aurelien de Seze; Jules Sandeau, her first
collaborator, who "reconciled her to life" and gave her a nom de
guerre; the inscrutable Merimee, who made no one happy; Musset--an
encounter from which both tiger-moths escaped with singed wings; the
odd transitional figure of Pagello; Michel Euraed; Liszt; Chopin,
whom she loved and nursed for eight years; her master Lamennais; her
master Pierre Leroux; her father-confessor Sainte-Beuve; and Gustave
Flaubert, the querulous friend of her last decade.

As we have compressed the long and complex story of her personal
relationships, so we must compress the intimately related history of
her works and her ideas. When under the inspiration of Rousseau, the
emancipated George Sand began to write, her purposes were but
vaguely defined. She conceived of life as primarily an opportunity
for unlimited self-expansion, and of literature as an opportunity
for unrestricted self-expression. "Nevertheless," she declares, "my
instincts have formed, without my privity, the theory I am about to
set down,--a theory which I have generally followed unconsciously.
... According to this theory, the novel is as much a work of poetry
as of analysis. It demands true situations, and characters not only
true but real, grouped about a type intended to epitomize the
sentiment or the main conceptions of the book. This type generally
represents the passion of love, since almost all novels are love-
stories. According to this theory (and it is here that it begins)
the writer must idealize this love, and consequently this type,--and
must not fear to attribute to it all the powers to which he inwardly
aspires, or all the sorrows whose pangs he has observed or felt.
This type must in no wise, however, become degraded by the
vicissitude of events; it must either die or triumph."

In 1831, when her pen began its fluent course through the lyrical
works of her first period--Indiana, Valentine, Lelia, Jacques, and
the rest--we conceive George Sand's culture, temper, and point of
view to have been fairly comparable with those of the young Shelley
when, fifteen years earlier, he with Mary Godwin joined Byron and
Jane Clairmont in Switzerland--young revoltes, all of them,
nourished on eighteenth century revolutionary philosophy and Gothic
novels. Both these eighteenth century currents meet in the work of
the new romantic group in England and in France. The innermost
origin of the early long poems of Shelley and the early works of
George Sand is in personal passion, in the commotion of a romantic
spirit beating its wings against the cage of custom and circumstance
and institutions. The external form of the plot, whatever is
fantastic and wilful in its setting and its adventures, is due to
the school of Ann Radcliffe. But the quality in Shelley and in
George Sand which bewitched even the austere Matthew Arnold in his
green and salad days is the poetising of that liberative eighteenth
century philosophy into "beautiful idealisms" of a love emancipated
from human limitations, a love exalted to the height of its gamut by
the influences of nature, triumphantly seeking its own or shattered
in magnificent despair. In her novels of the first period, George
Sand takes her Byronic revenge upon M. Dudevant. In Indiana and its
immediate successors, consciously or unconsciously, she declares to
the world what a beautiful soul M. Dudevant condemned to sewing on
buttons; in Jacques she paints the man who might fitly have matched
her spirit; and by the entire series, which now impresses us as
fantastic in sentiment no less than in plot, she won her early
reputation as the apologist for free love, the adversary of
marriage.

In her middle period--say from 1838 to 1848--of which The Miller of
Aginbault, Consuelo, and The Countess of Rudolstadt are
representative works, there is a marked subsidence of her personal
emotion, and, in compensation, a rising tide of humanitarian
enthusiasm. Gradually satiated with erotic passion, gradually
convinced that it is rather a mischief-maker than a reconstructive
force in a decrepit society, she is groping, indeed, between her
successive liaisons for an elusive felicity, for a larger mission
than inspiring Musset's Alexandrines or Chopin's nocturnes. It is
somewhat amusing, and at the same time indicative of her vague but
deep-seated moral yearnings, to find her writing rebukingly to
Sainte-Beuve, as early as 1834, apropos of his epicurean Volupte:
"Let the rest do as they like; but you, dear friend, you must
produce a book which will change and better mankind, do you see? You
can, and therefore should. Oh, if poor I could do it! I should lift
my head again and my heart would no longer be broken; but in vain I
seek a religion: Shall it be God, shall it be love, friendship, the
public welfare? Alas, it seems to me that my soul is framed to
receive all these impressions, without one effacing another ... Who
shall paint justice as it should, as it may, be in our modern
society?"

To Sainte-Beuve, himself an unscathed intellectual Odysseus, she
declares herself greatly indebted intellectually; but on the whole
his influence seems to have been tranquillizing. The material for
the radical program, economic, political, and religious, which, like
a spiritual ancestor of H. G. Wells, she eagerly sought to
popularize by the novels of her middle years, was supplied mainly by
Saint-Simon, Lamennais, and Leroux. Her new "religion of humanity,"
a kind of theosophical socialism, is too fantastically garbed to
charm the sober spirits of our age. And yet from the ruins of that
time and from the emotional extravagance of books grown tedious,
which she has left behind her, George Sand emerges for us with one
radiant perception which must be included in whatever religion
animates a democratic society: "Everyone must be happy, so that the
happiness of a few may not be criminal and cursed by God."

One of George Sand's French critics, M. Caro, a member of the
Academy, who deals somewhat austerely with her religiose enthusiasms
and with her Utopian projects for social reformation, remarks
gravely and not without tenderness:

"The one thing needful to this soul, so strong, so rich in
enthusiasm, is a humble moral quality that she disdains, and when
she has occasion to speak of it, even slanders,--namely resignation.
This is not, as she seems to think, the sluggish virtue of base
souls, who, in their superstitious servitude to force, hasten to
crouch beneath every yoke. That is a false and degrading
resignation; genuine resignation grows out of the conception of the
universal order, weighed against which individual sufferings,
without ceasing to be a ground of merit, cease to constitute a right
of revolt. ... Resignation, in the true, the philosophical, the
Christian sense, is a manly acceptance of moral law and also of the
laws essential to the social order; it is a free adherence to order,
a sacrifice approved by reason of a part of one's private good and
of one's personal freedom, not to might nor to the tyranny of a
human caprice, but to the exigencies of the common weal, which
subsists only by the concord of individual liberty with obedient
passions."

Well, resigned in the sense of defeated, George Sand never became;
nor did she, perhaps, ever wholly acquiesce in that scheme of things
which M. Caro impressively designates as "the universal order." Yet
with age, the abandonment of many distractions, the retreat to
Nohant, the consolations of nature, and her occupation with tales of
pastoral life, beginning with La Mare au Diable, there develops
within her, there diffuses itself around her, there appears in her
work a charm like that which falls upon green fields from the level
rays of the evening sun after a day of storms. It is not the charm,
precisely, of resignation; it is the charm of serenity--the serenity
of an old revolutionist who no longer expects victory in the morning
yet is secure in her confidence of a final triumph, and still more
secure in the goodness of her cause. "A hundred times in life," she
declares, "the good that one does seems to serve no immediate
purpose; yet it maintains in one way and another the tradition of
well wishing and well doing, without which all would perish." At the
outset of her career we compared her with Shelley. In her last
phase, she reminds us rather of the authors of Far from the Madding
Crowd and The Mill on the Floss, and of Wordsworth, once, too, a
torch of revolution, turning to his Michaels and his leech-gatherers
and his Peter Bells. Her exquisite pictures of pastoral life are
idealizations of it; her representations of the peasant are not
corroborated by Zola's; to the last she approaches the shield of
human nature from the golden side. But for herself at least she has
found a real secret of happiness in country life, tranquil work, and
a right direction given to her own heart and conscience.

It is at about this point in her spiritual development that she
turns towards Gustave Flaubert--perhaps a little suspiciously at
first, yet resolved from the first, according to her natural
instinct and her now fixed principles, to stimulate by believing in
his admirable qualities. Writing from Nohant in 1866 to him at
Croisset, she epitomises her distinction as a woman and as an author
in this playful sally: "Sainte-Beuve, who loves you nevertheless,
pretends that you are dreadfully vicious. But perhaps he sees with
eyes a bit dirty, like that learned botanist who pretends that the
germander is of a DIRTY yellow. The observation was so false that I
could not help writing on the margin of his book: 'IT IS YOU, WHOSE
EYES ARE DIRTY.'"

We have spoken of George Sand as a faithful daughter of the French
Revolution; and by way of contrast we may speak of Flaubert as a
disgruntled son of the Second Empire. Between his literary advent
and hers there is an interval of a generation, during which the
proud expansive spirit and the grandiose aspirations imparted to the
nation by the first Napoleon dwindled to a spirit of mediocrity and
bourgeois smugness under a Napoleon who had inherited nothing great
of his predecessor but his name. This change in the time-spirit may
help to explain the most significant difference between Flaubert and
George Sand. He inherited the tastes and imagination of the great
romantic generation; but he inherited none of its social and
political enthusiasm. He was disciplined by the romantic writers;
yet his reaction to the literary culture of his youth is not ethical
but aesthetic; he finds his inspiration less in Rousseau than in
Chateaubriand. He is bred to an admiration of eloquence, the poetic
phrase, the splendid picture, life in the grand style; with
increasing disgust he finds himself entering a society which, he
feels, neither understands nor values any of these things, and which
threatens their destruction. Consequently, we find him actuated as a
writer by two complementary passions--the love of splendor and the
hatred of mediocrity--two passions, of which the second sometimes
alternates with the first, sometimes inseparably fuses with it, and
ultimately almost extinguishes it.

The son of an eminent surgeon of Rouen, Gustave Flaubert may have
acquired from his father something of that scientific precision of
observation and that cutting accuracy of expression, by which he
gained his place at the head of modern French realism and won the
discipleship of the Goncourts, Daudet, Zola, and Maupassant and the
applause of such connoisseurs of technique as Walter Pater and Henry
James. From his mother's Norman ancestry he inherited the physique
of a giant, tainted with epilepsy; a Viking countenance, strong-
featured with leonine moustaches; and a barbaric temper, habitually
somewhat lethargic but irritable, and, when roused, violent and
intolerant of opposition. He had a private education at Rouen, with
wide desultory reading; went to Paris, which he hated, to study law,
which he also hated; frequented the theatres and studios; travelled
in Corsica, the Pyrenees, and the East, which he adored, seeing
Egypt, Palestine, Constantinople, and Greece; and he had one, and
only one, important love-affair, extending from 1846 to 1854--that
with Mme. Louise Colet, a woman of letters, whose difficult
relations with Flaubert are sympathetically touched upon in Pater's
celebrated essay on "Style." When by the death of his father, in
1845, he succeeded to the family-seat at Croisset, near Rouen, he
settled himself in a studious solitude to the pursuit of letters,
which he followed for thirty-four years with anguish of spirit and
dogged persistence.

Flaubert probably loved glory as much as any man; but he desired to
receive it only on his own terms. He profoundly appeals to writers
endowed with "the artistic conscience" as "the martyr of literary
style." In morals something of a libertine, in matters of art he
exhibited the intolerance of weakness in others and the remorseless
self-examination and self-torment commonly attributed to the
Puritan. His friend Maxime Du Camp, who tried to bring him out and
teach him the arts of popularity, he rebuffed with deliberate
insult. He developed an aversion to any interruption of his work,
and such tension and excitability of nerves that he shunned a day's
outing or a chat with an old companion, lest it distract him for a
month afterward. His mistress he seems to have estranged by an ill-
concealed preference to her of his exacting Muse. To illustrate his
"monkish" consecration to his craft we cannot do better than
reproduce a passage, quoted by Pater, from his letters to Madame
Colet:

"I must scold you for one thing, which shocks, scandalises me, the
small concern, namely, you show for art just now. As regards glory
be it so--there I approve. But for art!--the one thing in life that
is good and real--can you compare with it an earthly love?--prefer
the adoration of a relative beauty to the cultus of the true beauty?
Well! I tell you the truth. That is the one thing good in me: the
one thing I have, to me estimable. For yourself, you blend with the
beautiful a heap of alien things, the useful, the agreeable, what
not?

"The only way not to be unhappy is to shut yourself up in art, and
count everything else as nothing. Pride takes the place of all
beside when it is established on a large basis. Work! God wills it.
That, it seems to me, is clear.

"I am reading over again the Aeneid, certain verses of which I
repeat to myself to satiety. There are phrases there which stay in
one's head, by which I find myself beset, as with those musical airs
which are forever returning, and cause you pain, you love them so
much. I observe that I no longer laugh much, and am no longer
depressed. I am ripe, you talk of my serenity, and envy me. It may
well surprise you. Sick, irritated, the prey a thousand times a day
of cruel pain, I continue my labour like a true working-man, who,
with sleeves turned up, in the sweat of his brow, beats away at his
anvil, never troubling himself whether it rains or blows, for hail
or thunder. I was not like that formerly."

The half-dozen works which Flaubert beat out on his "anvil," with an
average expenditure of half-a-dozen years to each, were composed on
a theory of which the prime distinguishing feature was the great
doctrine of "impersonality." George Sand's fluent improvisations
ordinarily originated, as we have noted, in an impulse of her
lyrical idealism; she began with an aspiration of her heart, to
execute which she invented characters and plot so that she is always
on the inside of her story. According to Flaubert's theory, the
novel should originate in a desire to present a certain segment of
observed life. The author is to take and rigorously maintain a
position outside his work. The organ with which he collects his
materials is not his heart but his eyes, supplemented by the other
senses. Life, so far as the scientific observer can be sure of it,
and so far as the artist can control it for representation, is a
picture or series of pictures, a dramatic scene or a concatenation
of dramatic scenes. Let the novelist first, therefore, with
scrupulous fidelity and with minute regard for the possible
significance of every observable detail, fill his notebooks, amass
his materials, master his subject. After Flaubert, a first-rate
sociological investigator is three-fourths of a novelist. The rest
of the task is to arrange and set forth these facts so that they
shall tell the truth about life impressively, in scene and dramatic
spectacle, the meaning of which shall be implicit in the plot and
shall reach the reader's consciousness through his senses.

Critics have spent much time in discussing the conflict of
"romantic" and "realistic" tendencies in Flaubert's works. And it is
obviously easy, so far as subject-matter is concerned, to group his
books in two divisions: on the one hand, The Temptation of St.
Anthony, Salammbo, and two of the Trois Contes; on the other hand,
Madame Bovary, L'Education Sentimentale, and the incomplete Bouvard
and Pecuchet. We may call the tales in the first group romantic,
because the subject-matter is remote in time and place, and because
in them Flaubert indulges his passion for splendor--for oriental
scenery, for barbaric characters, the pomp of savage war and more
savage religion, events strange, terrible, atrocious. We may call
the stories in the other group realistic, because the subject-matter
is contemporary life in Paris and the provinces, and because in them
Flaubert indulges his hatred for mediocrity--for the humdrum
existence of the country doctor, the apothecary, the insipid clerk,
the vapid sentimental woman, and the charlatans of science. But as a
matter of fact, ALL his books are essentially constructed on the
same theory: all are just as "realistic" as Flaubert could make
them.

Henry James called Madame Bovary a brilliantly successful
application of Flaubert's theory; he pronounced L'Education
Sentimentale "elaborately and massively dreary"; and he briefly
dismissed Salammbo as an accomplished work of erudition. Salammbo is
indeed a work of erudition; years were spent in getting up its
archaeological details. But Madame Bovary is also a work of
erudition, and Bouvard and Pecuchet is a work of enormous erudition;
a thousand volumes were read for the notes of the first volume and
Flaubert is said to have killed himself by the labor of his
unfinished investigations. There is no important distinction to be
made between the method or the thoroughness with which he collected
his facts in the one case or the other; and the story of the war of
the mercenaries against the Carthaginians is evolved with the same
alternation of picture and dramatic spectacle and the same hard
merciless externality that distinguish the evolution of Emma
Bovary's history.

We may go still farther than that towards wiping out the distinction
between Flaubert's "romantic" and his "realistic" works; and by the
same stroke what is illusory in the pretensions of the realists,
namely, their aspiration to an "impersonal art."

If we were seeking to prove that an author can put NOTHING BUT
HIMSELF into his art, we should ask for no more impressive
illustions than precisely, Madame Bovary and Salammbo. These two
masterpieces disclose to reflection, no less patently than the works
of George Sand, their purpose and their meaning. And that purpose
and meaning are not a whit less personal to Flaubert than the
purpose and meaning of Indiana, let us say, are personal to George
Sand. The "meaning" of Madame Bovary and Salammbo is, broadly
speaking, Flaubert's sense of the significance--or, rather, of the
insignificance--of human life; and the "purpose" of the books is to
express it. The most lyrical of idealists can do no more to reveal
herself.

The demonstration afforded by a comparison of Salammbo and Madame
Bovary is particularly striking because the subject-matters are
superficially so unlike. But take any characteristic series of
pictures or incidents from Salammbo: take the passing of the
children through the fire to Moloch, or the description of the
leprous Hanno, or the physical surrender of the priestess to her
country's enemy, or the following picture of the crucified lion:

"They were marching through a wide defile, hedged in by two chains
of reddish hillocks, when a nauseous odor struck their nostrils, and
they believed that they saw something extraordinary at the top of a
carob tree; a lion's head stood up above the foliage.

"Running towards it, they found a lion attached to a cross by its
four limbs, like a criminal; his enormous muzzle hung to his breast,
and his forepaws, half concealed beneath the abundance of his mane,
were widely spread apart, like a bird's wings in flight; under the
tightly drawn skin, his ribs severally protruded and his hind legs
were nailed together, but were slightly drawn up; black blood had
trickled through the hairs, and collected in stalactites at the end
of his tail, which hung straight down the length of the cross. The
soldiers crowded around the beast, diverting themselves by calling
him 'Consul!' and 'Citizen of Rome!' and threw pebbles into his eyes
to scatter the swarming gnats."

And now take any characteristic series of pictures or incidents from
Madame Bovary: take Bovary's bungling and gruesome operations on the
club-footed ostler's leg, with the entire village clustering agape;
take the picture of the eyeless, idiotic beggar on the road to
Rouen; or the scene in which Emma offers herself for three thousand
francs to Rodolphe; or the following bit, only a bit, from the
detailed account of the heroine's last hours, after the arsenical
poisoning:

"Emma's head was turned towards her right shoulder, the corner of
her mouth, which was open, seemed like a black hole at the lower
part of her face; her two thumbs were bent into the palms of her
hands; a kind of white dust besprinkled her lashes, and her eyes
were beginning to disappear in that viscous pallor that looks like a
thin web, as if spiders had spun it over. The sheet sunk in from her
breast to her knees, and then rose at the tips of her toes, and it
seemed to Charles that infinite masses, an enormous load, were
weighing upon her.

"The church clock struck two. They could hear the loud murmur of the
river flowing in the darkness at the foot of the terrace. Monsieur
Bournisien from time to time blew his nose noisily and Homais' pen
was scratching over the paper."

In these two detached pictures--the one from a so-called "romantic,"
the other from a so-called "realistic" book--one readily observes
the likeness in the subjects, which are of a ghastly repulsiveness;
the same minuteness of observation--e.g., the lion's hind legs
"slightly drawn up," the woman's thumbs "bent into the palms of her
hands"; the same careful notation of effect on the several senses;
the same rhetorical heightening--e.g., the "stalactites at the end
of his tail," the web in the woman's eyes "as if spiders had spun it
over"; and finally, that celebrated detachment, that air as of a
medical examiner, recording the results of an autopsy. What can we
know of such an author? All, or nearly all, that he knew of himself,
provided we will searchingly ask ourselves what sort of mind is
steadily attracted to the painting of such pictures, to the
representation of such incidents, and what sort of mind expresses a
lifetime of brooding on the significance of life in two such books
as Madame Bovary and Salammbo.

At its first appearance, Madame Bovary was prosecuted, though
unsuccessfully, as offensive to public morals. In derision of this
famous prosecution, Henry James with studious jauntiness, asserts
that in the heat of his first admiration he thought what an
excellent moral tract it would make. "It may be very seriously
maintained," he continues, "that M. Flaubert's masterpiece is the
pearl of 'Sunday reading.'" As a work of fiction and recreation the
book lacks, in his opinion, one quite indispensable quality: it
lacks charm. Well, there are momentary flashes of beauty and grace,
dazzling bits of color, haunting melancholy cadences in every
chapter of Flaubert; but a charming book he never wrote. A total
impression of charm he never gave--he never could give; because his
total impression of life was not charming but atrocious. It is
perhaps an accident, as has been suggested, that one can so readily
employ Madame Bovary to illustrate that text on the "wages of sin."
Emma, to be sure, goes down the easy and alluring path to disgrace
and ruin. But that is only an incident in the wider meaning of
Flaubert's fiction, a meaning more amply expressed in Salammbo,
where not one foolish woman alone but thousands on thousands of men,
women, and children, mingled with charging elephants and vipers,
flounder and fight in indescribable welters of blood and filth, and
go down to rot in a common pit. If I read Flaubert's meaning right,
all human history is there; you may show it by painting on broad
canvas a Carthaginian battle-scene or by photographing the details
of a modern bedroom: a brief brightness, night and the odor of
carrion, a crucified lion, a dying woman, the jeering of ribald
mercenaries, the cackle of M. Homais. It is all one. If Flaubert
deserved prosecution, it was not for making vice attractive, but for
expressing with invasive energy that personal and desperately
pessimistic conception of life by which he was almost overwhelmed.

That a bad physical regimen, bad habits of work in excessive
quantities, and the solitude of his existence were contributory to
Flaubert's melancholy, his exacerbated egotism, and his pessimism is
sufficiently obvious in the letters. This Norman giant with his
aching head buried all day long in his arms, groping in anguish for
a phrase, has naturally a kindly disposition towards various
individuals of his species--is even capable of great generosity; but
as he admits with a truth and pathos, deeply appealing to the
maternal sympathies of his correspondent, he has no talent for
living. He has never been able, like richer and more resourceful
souls, to reconcile being a man with being an author. He has made
his choice; he has renounced the cheerful sanities of the world:

"I pass entire weeks without exchanging a word with a human being;
and at the end of the week it is not possible for me to recall a
single day nor any event whatsoever. I see my mother and my niece on
Sundays, and that is all. My only company consists of a band of rats
in the garret, which make an infernal racket above my head, when the
water does not roar or the wind blow. The nights are black as ink,
and a silence surrounds me comparable to that of the desert.
Sensitiveness is increased immeasurably in such a setting. I have
palpitations of the heart for nothing.

"All that results from our charming profession. That is what it
means to torment the soul and the body. But perhaps this torment is
our proper lot here below."

To George Sand, who wrote as naturally as she breathed and almost as
easily, seclusion and torment were by no means the necessary
conditions of literary activity. Enormously productive, with a
hundred books to his half-a-dozen, she has never dedicated and
consecrated herself to her profession but has lived heartily and a
bit recklessly from day to day, spending herself in many directions
freely, gaily, extravagantly. Now that she has definitely said
farewell to her youth, she finds that she is twenty years younger;
and now that she is, in a sense, dissipating her personality and
living in the lives of others, she finds that she is happier than
ever before. "It can't be imperative to work so painfully"--such is
the burden of her earlier counsels to Flaubert; "spare yourself a
little, take some exercise, relax the tendons of your mind, indulge
a little the physical man. Live a little as I do; and you will take
your fatigues and illnesses and occasional dolours and dumps as
incidents of the day's work and not magnify them into the
mountainous overshadowing calamities from which you deduce your
philosophy of universal misery." No advice could have been more
wholesome or more timely. And with what pictures of her own busy
felicity she reenforces her advice! I shall produce three of them
here in order to emphasize that precious thing which George Sand
loved to impart, and which she had the gift of imparting, namely,
joy, the spontaneous joyousness of her own nature. The first passage
is from a letter of June 14, 1867:

"I am a little remorseful to take whole days from your work, I who
am never bored with loafing, and whom you could leave for whole
hours under a tree, or before two lighted logs, with the assurance
that I should find there something interesting. I know so well how
to live OUTSIDE OF MYSELF. It hasn't always been like that. I also
was young and subject to indignations. It is over! Since I have
dipped into real nature, I have found there an order, a system, a
calmness of cycles which is lacking in mankind, but which man can,
up to a certain point, assimilate when he is not too directly at
odds with the difficulties of his own life. When these difficulties
return, he must endeavor to avoid them; but if he has drunk the cup
of the eternally true, he does not get too excited for or against
the ephemeral and relative truth."

The second passage is of June 21:

"I love everything that makes up a milieu, the rolling of the
carriages and the noise of the workmen in Paris, the cries of a
thousand birds in the country, the movement of the ships on the
waters. I love also absolute, profound silence, and, in short, I
love everything that is around me, no matter where I am."

The last passage gives a glimpse of the seventeenth of January,
1869, a typical day in Nohant:

"The individual named George Sand is well: he is enjoying the
marvellous winter which reigns in Berry, gathering flowers, noting
interesting botanical anomalies, making dresses and mantles for his
daughter-in-law, costumes for the marionettes, cutting out scenery,
dressing dolls, reading music, but above all spending hours with the
little Aurore, who is a marvellous child. There is not a more
tranquil or a happier individual in his domestic life than this old
troubadour retired from business, who sings from time to time his
little song to the moon, without caring much whether he sings well
or ill, provided he sings the motif that runs in his head, and who,
the rest of the time, idles deliciously.... This pale character has
the great pleasure of loving you with all his heart, and of not
passing a day without thinking of the other old troubadour, confined
in his solitude of a frenzied artist, disdainful of all the
pleasures of the world."

Flaubert did "exercise" a little--once or twice--in compliance with
the injunctions of his "dear master"; but he rather resented the
implication that his pessimism was personal, that it had any
particular connection with his peculiar temperament or habits. He
wished to think of himself as a stoic, quite indifferent about his
"carcase." His briefer black moods he might acknowledge had
transitory causes. But his general and abiding conceptions of
humanity were the result of dispassionate reflections. "You think,"
he cries in half-sportive pique, "that because I pass my life trying
to make harmonious phrases, in avoiding assonances, that I too have
not my little judgments on the things of this world? Alas! Yes! and
moreover I shall burst, enraged at not expressing them." And later:
"Yes, I am susceptible to disinterested angers, and I love you all
the more for loving me for that. Stupidity and injustice make me
roar,--and I howl in my corner against a lot of things 'that do not
concern me.'" "On the day that I am no longer in a rage, I shall
fall flat as the marionette from which one withdraws the support of
the stick."

So far as Flaubert's pessimism has an intellectual basis, it rests
upon his researches in human history. For Salammbo and The
Temptation of St. Anthony he ransacked ancient literature, devoured
religions and mythologies, and saturated himself in the works of the
Church Fathers. In order to get up the background of his Education
Sentimentale he studied the Revolution of 1848 and its roots in the
Revolution of 1789. He found, shall we say? what he was looking for-
-inexhaustible proofs of the cruelty and stupidity of men. After
"gulping" down the six volumes of Buchez and Roux, he declares: "The
clearest thing I got out of them is an immense disgust for the
French.... Not a liberal idea which has not been unpopular, not a
just thing that has not caused scandal, not a great man who has not
been mobbed or knifed. 'The history of the human mind is the history
of human folly,' as says M. Voltaire. ... Neo-Catholicism on the one
hand, and Socialism on the other, have stultified France." In
another letter of the same Period and similar provocation: "However
much you fatten human cattle, giving them straw as high as their
bellies, and even gilding their stable, they will remain brutes, no
matter what one says. All the advance that one can hope for, is to
make the brute a little less wicked. But as for elevating the ideas
of the mass, giving it a larger and therefore a less human
conception of God, I have my doubts."

In addition to the charges of violence and cruelty, which he brought
against all antiquity as well as against modern times, much in the
fashion of Swift or the older Mark Twain, Flaubert nursed four grave
causes of indignation, made four major charges of folly against
modern "Christian" civilization.  In religion, we have substituted
for Justice the doctrine of Grace. In our sociological
considerations we act no longer with discrimination but upon a
principle of universal sympathy. In the field of art and literature
we have abandoned criticism and research for the Beautiful in favor
of universal puffery. In politics we have nullified intelligence and
renounced leadership to embrace universal suffrage, which is the
last disgrace of the human spirit.

It must be acknowledged that Flaubert's arraignment of modern
society possesses the characteristics commended by the late Barett
Wendell: it is marked in a high degree by "unity, mass, and
coherence." It must be admitted also that George Sand possessed in a
high degree the Pauline virtue of being "not easily provoked," or
she never could have endured so patiently, so sweetly, Flaubert's
reiterated and increasingly ferocious assaults upon her own master
passion, her ruling principle. George Sand was one whose entire life
signally attested the power of a "saving grace," resident in the
creative and recuperative energies of nature, resident in the
magical, the miracle-working, powers of the human heart, the powers
of love and sympathy. She was a modern spiritual adventurer who had
escaped unscathed from all the anathemas of the old theology; and
she abounded, like St. Francis, in her sense of the new dispensation
and in her benedictive exuberance towards all the creatures of God,
including not merely sun, moon, and stars and her sister the lamb
but also her brother the wolf. On this principle she loves
Flaubert!--and archly asserts her arch-heresy in his teeth. He
complains that her fundamental defect is that she doesn't know how
to "hate." She replies, with a point that seems never really to have
pierced his thick casing of masculine egotism:

"Artists are spoiled children and the best are great egotists. You
say that I love them too well; I like them as I like the woods and
the fields, everything, everyone that I know a little and that I
study continually. I make my life in the midst of all that, and as I
like my life, I like all that nourishes it and renews it. They do me
a lot of ill turns which I see, but which I no longer feel. I know
that there are thorns in the hedges, but that does not prevent me
from putting out my hands and finding flowers there. If all are not
beautiful, all are interesting. The day you took me to the Abbey of
Saint-Georges I found the scrofularia borealis, a very rare plant in
France. I was enchanted; there was much----in the neighborhood where
I gathered it. Such is life!

"And if one does not take life like that, one cannot take it in any
way, and then how can one endure it? I find it amusing and
interesting, and since I accept EVERYTHING, I am so much happier and
more enthusiastic when I meet the beautiful and the good. If I did
not have a great knowledge of the species, I should not have quickly
understood you, or known you or loved you."

Two years later the principles and tempers of both these
philosophers were put to their severest trial. In 1870, George Sand
had opportunity to apply her doctrine of universal acceptance to the
Prussians in Paris. Flaubert had opportunity to welcome scientific
organization in the Prussian occupation of his own home at Croisset.
The first reaction of both was a quite simple consternation and
rage, in which Flaubert cries, "The hopeless barbarism of humanity
fills me with a black melancholy," and George Sand, for the moment
assenting, rejoins: "Men are ferocious and conceited brutes." As the
war thickens around him and the wakened militancy of his compatriots
presses him hard, Flaubert becomes more and more depressed; he
forebodes a general collapse of civilization--before the century
passes, a conflict of races, "in which several millions of men kill
one another in one engagement." With the curiously vengeful
satisfaction which mortals take in their own misery when it offers
occasion to cry "I told you so," he exclaims: "Behold then, the
NATURAL MAN. Make theories now! Boast the progress, the
enlightenment and the good sense of the masses, and the gentleness
of the French people! I assure you that anyone here who ventured to
preach peace would get himself murdered."

George Sand in her fields at Nohant--not "above" but a little aside
from the conflict--turns instinctively to her peasant doggedly,
placidly, sticking at his plow; turns to her peasant with a kind of
intuition that he is a symbol of faith, that he holds the keys to a
consolation, which the rest of us blindly grope for: "He is
imbecile, people say; no, he is a child in prosperity, a man in
disaster, more of a man than we who complain; he says nothing, and
while people are killing, he is sowing, repairing continually on one
side what they are destroying  on the other." Flaubert, who thinks
that he has no "illusions" about peasants or the "average man,"
brings forward his own specific of a quite different nature: "Do you
think that if France, instead of being governed on the whole by the
crowd, were in the power of the mandarins, we should be where we are
now? If, instead of having wished to enlighten the lower classes, we
had busied ourselves with instructing the higher, we should not have
seen M. de Keratry proposing the pillage of the duchy of Baden."

In the great war of our own time with the same foes, our
professional advocates of "preparedness," our cheerful chemists, our
scientific "intellectuals"--all our materialistic thinkers hard-
shell and soft-shell,--took the position of Flaubert, just
presented; reproached us bitterly for our slack, sentimental
pacificism; and urged us with all speed to emulate the scientific
spirit of our enemy. There is nothing more instructive in this
correspondence than to observe how this last fond illusion falls
away from Flaubert under the impact of an experience which
demonstrated to his tortured senses the truth of the old Rabelaisian
utterance, that "science without conscience is the ruin of the
soul."

"What use, pray," he cries in the last disillusion, "is science,
since this people abounding in scholars commits abominations worthy
of the Huns and worse than theirs, because they are systematic,
cold-blooded, voluntary, and have for an excuse, neither passion nor
hunger?" And a few months later, he is still in mad anguish of
desolation:

"I had some illusions! What barbarity! What a slump! I am wrathful
at my contemporaries for having given me the feelings of a brute of
the twelfth century! I'm stifling in gall! These officers who break
mirrors with white gloves on, who know Sanskrit, and who fling
themselves on the champagne; who steal your watch and then send you
their visiting card, this war for money, these civilized savages
give me more horror than cannibals. And all the world is going to
imitate them, is going to be a soldier! Russia has now four millions
of them. All Europe will wear a uniform. If we take our revenge, it
will be ferocious in the last degree; and, mark my word, we are
going to think only of that, of avenging ourselves on Germany."

Under the imminence of the siege of Paris, Flaubert had drilled men,
with an out-flashing of the savage fighting spirit of his ancestors,
of which he was more than half ashamed. But at heart he is more
dismayed, more demoralized, more thoroughly prostrated than George
Sand. He has not fortitude actually to face the degree of depravity
which he has always imputed to the human race, the baseness with
which his imagination has long been easily and cynically familiar.
As if his pessimism had been only a literary pigment, a resource of
the studio, he shudders to find Paris painted in his own ebony
colors, and his own purely "artistic" hatred of the bourgeois,
translated into a principle of action, expressing itself in the
horrors of the Commune, with half the population trying to strangle
the other half. Hatred, after all, contempt and hatred, are not
quite the most felicitous watchwords for the use of human society.
Like one whose cruel jest has been taken more seriously than he had
intended and has been turned upon his own head, Flaubert considers
flight: "I cherish the following dream: of going to live in the sun
in a tranquil country." As a substitute for a physical retreat, he
buries himself in a study of Buddhism, and so gradually returns to
the pride of his intellectual isolation. As the tumult in his senses
subsides, he even ventures to offer to George Sand the anodyne of
his old philosophical despair: "Why are you so sad? Humanity offers
nothing new. Its irremediable misery has filled me with sadness ever
since my youth. And in addition I now have no disillusions. I
believe that the crowd, the common herd will always be hateful. The
only important thing is a little group of minds always the same--
which passes the torch from one to another."

There we must leave Flaubert, the thinker. He never passes beyond
that point in his vision of reconstruction: a "legitimate
aristocracy" established in contempt of the average man--with the
Academy of Sciences displacing the Pope.

George Sand, amid these devastating external events, is beginning to
feel the insidious siege of years. She can no longer rally her
spiritual forces with the "bright speed" that she had in the old
days. The fountain of her faith, which has never yet failed of
renewal, fills more slowly. For weeks she broods in silence, fearing
to augment her friend's dismay with more of her own, fearing to
resume a debate in which her cause may be better than her arguments
and in which depression of her physical energy may diminish her
power to put up a spirited defence before the really indomitable
"last ditch" of her position.  When Flaubert himself makes a
momentary gesture towards the white flag, and talks of retreat, she
seizes the opportunity for a short scornful sally. "Go to live in
the sun in a tranquil country! Where? What country is going to be
tranquil in this struggle of barbarity against civilization, a
struggle which is going to be universal?" A month later she gives
him fair warning that she has no intention of acknowledging final
defeat: "For me, the ignoble experiment that Paris is attempting or
is undergoing, proves nothing against the laws of the eternal
progression of men and things, and, if I have gained any principles
in my mind, good or bad, they are neither shattered nor changed by
it. For a long time I have accepted patience as one accepts the sort
of weather there is, the length of winter, old age, lack of success
in all its forms." But Flaubert, thinking that he has detected in
her public utterances a decisive change of front, privately urges
her in a finely figurative passage of a letter which denounces
modern republicanism, universal suffrage, compulsory education, and
the press--Flaubert urges her to come out openly in renunciation of
her faith in humanity and her popular progressivistic doctrines. I
must quote a few lines of his attempt at seduction:

"Ah, dear good master, if you could only hate! That is what you
lack, hate. In spite of your great Sphinx eyes, you have seen the
world through a golden colour. That comes from the sun in your
heart; but so many shadows have risen that now you are not
recognizing things any more. Come now! Cry out! Thunder! Take your
great lyre and touch the brazen string: the monsters will flee.
Bedew us with drops of the blood of wounded Themis."

That summons roused the citadel, but not to surrender, not to
betrayal. The eloquent daughter of the people caught up her great
lyre--in the public Reponse a un ami of October 3, 1871. But her
fingers passed lightly over the "brazen string" to pluck again with
old power the resonant golden notes. Her reply, with its direct
retorts to Flaubert, is not perhaps a very closely reasoned
argument. In making the extract I have altered somewhat the order of
the sentences:

"And what, you want me to stop loving? You want me to say that I
have been mistaken all my life, that humanity is contemptible,
hateful, that it always has been and always will be so? ... What,
then, do you want me to do, so as to isolate myself from my kind,
from my compatriots, from the great family in whose bosom my own
family is only one ear of corn in the terrestrial field? ... But it
is impossible, and your steady reason puts up with the most
unreasonable of Utopias. In what Eden, in what fantastic Eldorado
will you hide your family, your little group of friends, your
intimate happiness, so that the lacerations of the social state and
the disasters of the country shall not reach them? ... In vain you
are prudent and withdraw, your refuge will be invaded in its turn,
and in perishing with human civilization you will be no greater a
philosopher for not having loved, than those who threw themselves
into the flood to save some debris of humanity. ... The people, you
say! The people is yourself and myself. It would be useless to deny
it. There are not two races. ... No, no, people do not isolate
themselves, the ties of blood are not broken, people do not curse or
scorn their kind. Humanity is not a vain word. Our life is composed
of love, and not to love is to cease to live."

This is, if you please, an effusion of sentiment, a chant of faith.
In a world more and more given to judging trees by their fruits, we
should err if we dismissed this sentiment, this faith, too lightly.
Flaubert may have been a better disputant; he had a talent for
writing. George Sand may have chosen her side with a truer instinct;
she had a genius for living. This faith of hers sustained well the
shocks of many long years, and this sentiment made life sweet.

STUART P. SHERMAN




I. TO GEORGE SAND
1863

Dear Madam,

I am not grateful to you for having performed what you call a duty.
The goodness of your heart has touched me and your sympathy has made
me proud. That is the whole of it.

Your letter which I have just received gives added value to your
article [Footnote:  Letter about Salammbo, January, 1863, Questions
d'art et de litterature.] and goes on still further, and I do not
know what to say to you unless it be that _I_ QUITE FRANKLY LIKE
YOU.

It was certainly not I who sent you in September, a little flower in
an envelope. But, strange to say, at the same time, I received in
the same manner, a leaf of a tree.

As for your very cordial invitation, I am not answering yes or no,
in true Norman fashion. Perhaps some day this summer I shall
surprise you. For I have a great desire to see you and to talk with
you.

It would be very delightful to have your portrait to hang on the
wall in my study in the country where I often spend long months
entirely alone. Is the request indiscreet? If not, a thousand thanks
in advance. Take them with the others which I reiterate.




II. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 15 March, 1864

Dear Flaubert,

I don't know whether you lent me or gave me M. Taine's beautiful
book. In the uncertainty I am returning it to you. Here I have had
only the time to read a part of it, and at Nohant, I shall have only
the time to scribble for Buloz; but when I return, in two months, I
shall ask you again for this admirable work of which the scope is so
lofty, so noble.

I am sorry not to have said adieu to you; but as I return soon, I
hope that you will not have forgotten me and that you will let me
read something of your own also.

You were so good and so sympathetic to me at the first performance
of Villemer that I no longer admire only your admirable talent, I
love you with all my heart.

George Sand



III. TO GEORGE SAND
Paris, 1866

Why of course I am counting on your visit at my own house. As for
the hindrances which the fair sex can oppose to it, you will not
notice them (be sure of it) any more than did the others. My little
stories of the heart or of the senses are not displayed on the
counter. But as it is far from my quarter to yours and as you might
make a useless trip, when you arrive in Paris, give me a rendezvous.
And at that we shall make another to dine informally tete-a-tete.

I sent your affectionate little greeting to Bouilhet.

At the present time I am disheartened by the populace which rushes
by under my windows in pursuit of the fatted calf. And they say that
intelligence is to be found in the street!



IV. To M. Flobert (Justave) M.
of Letters Boulevard du Temple, 42, Paris Paris, 10 May, 1866

[The postage stamp bears the mark Palaiseau 9 May, '66.]

M. Flobaire, You must be a truly dirty oaf to have taken my name and
written a letter with it to a lady who had some favors for me which
you doubtless received in my place and inherited my hat in place of
which I have received yours which you left there. It is the lowness
of that lady's conduct and of yours that make me think that she
lacks education entirely and all those sentiments which she ought to
understand. If you are content to have written Fanie and Salkenpeau
I am content not to have read them. You mustn't get excited about
that, I saw in the papers that there were outrages against the
Religion in whose bosom I have entered again after the troubles I
had with that lady when she made me come to my senses and repent of
my sins with her and, in consequence if I meet you with her whom I
care for no longer you shall have my sword at your throat. That will
be the Reparation of my sins and the punishment of your infamy at
the same time. That is what I tell you and I salute you.

Coulard

At Palaiseau with the Monks

They told me that I was well punished for associating with the girls
from the theatre and with aristocrats.



V. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
1866

Sir,

After the most scrupulous combined searches I found at last the body
of my beloved brother. You are in belles-lettres and you would have
been struck by the splendor of that scene. The corpse which was a
Brother extended nonchalantly on the edge of a foul ditch. I forgot
my sorrow a moment to contemplate he was good this young man whom
the matches killed, but the real guilty one was that woman whom
passions have separated in this disordered current in which our
unhappy country is at the moment when it is more to be pitied than
blamed for there are still men who have a heart. You who express
yourself so well tell that siren that she has destroyed a great
citizen. I don't need to tell you that we count on you to dig his
noble tomb. Tell Silvanit also that she can come notwithstanding for
education obliges me to offer her a glass of wine. I have the honor
to salute you.

I also have the honor to salute Silvanit for whom I am a brother
much to be pitied.

Goulard the elder

Have the goodness to transmit to Silvanit the last wishes of my poor
Theodore. [Footnote: Letter written by Eugene Lambert.]



VI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Palaiseau 14 May, 1866

This is not a letter from Goulard. He is dead! The false Goulard
killed him by surpassing him in the real and the comic. But this
false Goulard also does not deny himself anything, the rascal!

Dear friend, I must tell you that I want to dedicate to you my novel
which is just coming out. But as every one has his own ideas on the
subject--as Goulard would say--I would like to know if you permit me
to put at the head of my title page simply: to my friend Gustave
Flaubert. I have formed the habit of putting my novels under the
patronage of a beloved name. I dedicated the last to Fromentin.

I am waiting until it is good weather to ask you to come to dine at
Palaiseau with Goulard's Sirenne, and some other Goulards of your
kind and of mine. Up to now it has been frightfully cold and it is
not worth the trouble to come to the country to catch a cold.

I have finished my novel, and you?

I kiss the two great diamonds which adorn your face.

Jorje Sens

The elder Goulard is my little Lambert, it seems to me that he is
quite literary in that way.



VII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Palaiseau, Wednesday, 16 May, 1866

Well, my dear friend, since you are going away, and as in a
fortnight, I am going to Berry for two or three months, do try to
find time to come tomorrow Thursday. You will dine with dear and
interesting Marguerite Thuillier who is also going away.

Do come to see my hermitage and Sylvester's. By leaving Paris, gare
de Sceaux, at I o'clock, you will be at my house at 2 o'clock, or by
leaving at 5, you will be there at 6, and in the evening you could
leave with my strolling players at 9 or 10. Bring the copy.
[Footnote:  This refers to Monsieur Sylveitre, which had just
appeared.] Put in it all the criticisms which occur to you. That
will be very good for me. People ought to do that for each other as
Balzac and I used to do. That doesn't make one person alter the
other; quite the contrary, for in general, one gets more determined
in one's moi, one completes it, explains it better, entirely
develops it, and that is why friendship is good, even in literature,
where the first condition of any worth is to be one's self.

If you can not come--I shall have a thousand regrets, but then I am
depending upon you Monday before dinner. Au revoir and thank you for
the fraternal permission of dedication.

G. Sand



VIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Paris, 17 or 18 May, 1866

Don't expect me at your house on Monday. I am obliged to go to
Versailles on that day. But I shall be at Magny's.

A thousand fond greetings from your

G. Flaubert



IX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 31 July, 1866

My good dear comrade,

Will you really be in Paris these next few days as you led me to
hope? I leave here the 2nd. What good luck if I found you at dinner
on the following Monday. And besides, they are putting on a play
[Footnote: Les Don Juan de village.] by my son and me, on the 10th.
Could I possibly get along without you on that day? I shall feel
some EMOTION this time because of my dear collaborator. Be a good
friend and try to come! I embrace you with all my heart in that
hope.

The late Goulard,
G. Sand.



X. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 4 Aug., 1866

Dear friend, as I'm always out, I don't want you to come and find
the door shut and me far away. Come at six o'clock and dine with me
and my children whom I expect tomorrow. We dine at Magny's always at
6 o'clock promptly. You will give us 'a sensible pleasure' as used
to say, as would have said, alas, the unhappy Goulard. You are an
exceedingly kind brother to promise to be at Don Juan. For that I
kiss you twice more.

G. Sand

Saturday evening.



XI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT

It is next THURSDAY,

I wrote you last night, and our letters must have crossed.

Yours from the heart,

G. Sand

Sunday, 5 August, 1866.



XII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, Wednesday evening, 22 August, 1866

My good comrade and friend, I am going to see Alexandre at Saint-
Valery Saturday evening. I shall stay there Sunday and Monday, I
shall return Tuesday to Rouen and go to see you. Tell me how that
strikes you. I shall spend the day with you if you like, returning
to spend the night in Rouen, if I inconvenience you as you are
situated, and I shall leave Wednesday morning or evening for Paris.
A word in response at once, by telegraph if you think that your
answer would not reach me by post before Saturday at 4 o'clock.

I think that I shall be all right but I have a horrid cold. If it
grows too bad, I shall telegraph that I can not stir; but I have
hopes, I am already better.

I embrace you.

G. Sand



XIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Saint-Valery, 26 August, 1866 Monday, 1 A.M.

Dear friend, I shall be in Rouen on Tuesday at 1 o'clock, I shall
plan accordingly. Let me explore Rouen which I don't know, or show
it to me if you have the time. I embrace you. Tell your mother how
much I appreciate and am touched, by the kind little line which she
wrote to me.

G. Sand



XIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Paris, 31 August, 1866

First of all, embrace your good mother and your charming niece for
me. I am really touched by the kind welcome I received in your
clerical setting, where a stray animal of my species is an anomaly
that one might find constraining. Instead of that, they received me
as if I were one of the family and I saw that all that great
politeness came from the heart. Remember me to all the very kind
friends. I was truly exceedingly happy with you. And then, you, you
are a dear kind boy, big man that you are, and I love you with all
my heart. My head is full of Rouen, of monuments and queer houses.
All of that seen with you strikes me doubly. But your house, your
garden, your CITADEL, it is like a dream and it seems to me that I
am still there.

I found Paris very small yesterday, when crossing the bridges.

I want to start back again. I did not see you enough, you and your
surroundings; but I must rush off to the children, who are calling
and threatening me. I embrace you and I bless you all.

G. Sand

Paris, Friday.

On going home yesterday, I found Couture to whom I said on your
behalf that HIS portrait of me was, according to you, the best that
anyone had made. He was not a little flattered. I am going to hunt
up an especially good copy to send you.

I forgot to get three leaves from the tulip tree, you must send them
to me in a letter, it is for something cabalistic.



XV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 2 September, 1866

Send me back the lace shawl. My faithful porter will forward it to
me wherever I am. I don't know yet. If my children want to go with
me into Brittany, I shall go to fetch them, if not I shall go on
alone wherever chance leads me. In travelling, I fear only
distractions. But I take a good deal on myself and I shall end by
improving myself. You write me a good dear letter which I kiss.
Don't forget the three leaves from the tulip tree. They are asking
me at the Odeon to let them perform a fairy play: la Nuit de Noel
from the Theatre de Nohant, I don't want to, it's too small a thing.
But since they have that idea, why wouldn't they try your fairy
play? Do you want me to ask them? I have a notion that this would be
the right theatre for a thing of that type. The management, Chilly
and Duquesnel, wants to have scenery and MACHINERY and yet keep it
literary. Let us discuss this when I return here.

You still have the time to write to me. I shall not leave for three
days yet. Love to your family.

G. S.

Sunday evening

I forgot! Levy promises to send you my complete works, they are
endless. You must stick them on a shelf in a corner and dig into
them when your heart prompts you.



XVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 21 September, 1866

I have just returned from a twelve days trip with my children, and
on getting home I find your two letters. That fact, added to the joy
of seeing Mademoiselle Aurore again, fresh and pretty, makes me
quite happy. And you my Benedictine, you are quite alone in your
ravishing monastery, working and never going out? That is what it
means TO HAVE ALREADY gone out too much. Monsieur craves Syrias,
deserts, dead seas, dangers and fatigues! But nevertheless he can
make Bovarys in which every little cranny of life is studied and
painted with mastery. What an odd person who can also compose the
fight between the Sphinx and the Chimaera! You are a being quite
apart, very mysterious, gentle as a lamb with it all. I have had a
great desire to question you, but a too great respect for you has
prevented me; for I know how to make light only of my own
calamities, while those which a great mind has had to undergo so as
to be in a condition to produce, seem to me like sacred things which
should not be touched roughly nor thoughtlessly.

Sainte-Beuve, who loves you all the same, claims that you are
horribly vicious. But perhaps he may see with somewhat unclean eyes,
like this learned botanist who asserts that the germander  is of
DIRTY yellow color. The observation was so false, that I could not
refrain from writing on the margin of his book: IT IS BECAUSE YOU
HAVE DIRTY EYES.

I suppose that a man of intelligence may have great curiosity.  I
have not had it, lacking the courage. I have preferred to leave my
mind incomplete, that is my affair, and every one is free to embark
either on a great ship in full sail, or on a fisherman's vessel. The
artist is an explorer whom nothing ought to stop, and who does
neither good nor ill when turning to the right or to the left. His
end justifies all.

It is for him to know after a little experience, what are the
conditions of his soul's health. As for me, I think that yours is in
a good condition of grace, since you love to work and to be alone in
spite of the rain.

Do you know that, while there has been a deluge everywhere, we have
had, except a few downpours, fine sunshine in Brittany? A horrible
wind on the shore, but how beautiful the high surf! and since the
botany of the coast carried me away, and Maurice and his wife have a
passion for shellfish, we endured it all gaily. But on the whole,
Brittany is a famous see-saw.

However, we are a little fed up with dolmens and menhirs and we have
fallen on fetes and have seen costumes which they said had been
suppressed but which the old people still wear. Well! These men of
the past are ugly with their home-spun trousers, their long hair,
their jackets with pockets under the arms, their sottish air, half
drunkard, half saint. And the Celtic relics, uncontestably curious
for the archaeologist, have naught for the artist, they are badly
set, badly composed, Carnac and Erdeven have no physiognomy. In
short, Brittany shall not have my bones! I prefer a thousand times
your rich Normandy, or, in the days when one has dramas in his HEAD,
a real country of horror and despair. There is nothing in a country
where priests rule and where Catholic vandalism has passed, razing
monuments of the ancient world and sowing the plagues of the future.

You say US a propos of the fairy play. I don't know with whom you
have written it, but I still fancy that it ought to succeed at the
Odeon under its present management. If I was acquainted with it, I
should know how to accomplish for you what one never knows how to do
for one's self, namely, to interest the directors. Anything of yours
is bound to be too original to be understood by that coarse Dumaine.
Do have a copy at your house, and next month I shall spend a day
with you in order to have you read it to me. Le Croisset is so near
to Palaiseau!--and I am in a phase of tranquil activity, in which I
should love to see your great river flow, and to keep dreaming in
your orchard, tranquil itself, quite on top of the cliff. But I am
joking, and you are working. You must forgive the abnormal
intemperance of one who has just been seeing only stones and has not
perceived even a pen for twelve days.

You are my first visit to the living on coming out from the complete
entombment of my poor Moi. Live! There is my oremus and my
benediction and I embrace you with all my heart.

G. Sand



XVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, 1866

I a mysterious being, dear master, nonsense! I think that I am
sickeningly platitudinous, and I am sometimes exceedingly bored with
the bourgeois which I have under my skin. Sainte-Beuve, between
ourselves, does not know me at all, no matter what he says. I even
swear to you (by the smile of your grandchild) that I know few men
less vicious than I am. I have dreamed much and have done very
little. What deceives the superficial observer is the lack of
harmony between my sentiments and my ideas. If you want my
confession, I shall make it freely to you. The sense of the
grotesque has restrained me from an inclination towards a disorderly
life. I maintain that cynicism borders on chastity. We shall have
much to say about it to each other (if your heart prompts you) the
first time we see each other.

Here is the program that I propose to you. My house will be full and
uncomfortable for a month. But towards the end of October or the
beginning of November (after Bouilhet's play) nothing will prevent
you, I hope, from returning here with me, not for a day, as you say,
but for a week at least. You shall have "your little table and
everything necessary for writing." Is it agreed?

As for the fairy play, thanks for your kind offers of service. I
shall get hold of the thing for you (it was done in collaboration
with Bouilhet). But I think it is a trifle weak and I am torn
between the desire of gaining a few piasters and the shame of
showing such a piece of folly.

I think that you are a little severe towards Brittany, not towards
the Bretons who seem to me repulsive animals. A propos of Celtic
archaeology, I published in L'Artiste in 1858, a rather good hoax on
the shaking stones, but I have not the number here and I don't
remember the month.

I read, straight through, the 10 volumes of Histoire de ma vie, of
which I knew about two thirds but only fragmentarily. What struck me
most was the life in the convent. I have a quantity of observations
to make to you which occurred to me.



XVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 28 September, 1866

It is agreed, dear comrade and good friend. I shall do my best to be
in Paris for the performance of your friend's play, and I shall do
my fraternal duty there as usual; after which we shall go to your
house and I shall stay there a week, but on condition that you will
not put yourself out of your room. To be an inconvenience distresses
me and I don't need so much bother in order to sleep. I sleep
everywhere, in the ashes, or under a kitchen bench, like a stable
dog. Everything shines with spotlessness at your house, so one is
comfortable everywhere. I shall pick a quarrel with your mother and
we shall laugh and joke, you and I, much and more yet. If it's good
weather, I shall make you go out walking, if it rains continually,
we shall roast our bones before the fire while telling our heart
pangs. The great river will run black or grey under the window
saying always, QUICK! QUICK! and carrying away our thoughts, and our
days, and our nights, without stopping to notice such small things.

I have packed and sent by EXPRESS a good proof of Couture's picture,
signed by the engraver, my poor friend, Manceau. It is the best that
I have and I have only just found it. I have sent with it a
photograph of a drawing by Marchal which was also like me; but one
changes from year to year. Age gives unceasingly another character
to the face of people who think and study, that is why their
portraits do not look like one another nor like them for long. I
dream so much and I live so little, that sometimes I am only three
years old. But, the next day I am three hundred, if the dream has
been sombre. Isn't it the same with you? Doesn't it seem at moments,
that you are beginning life without even knowing what it is, and at
other times don't you feel over you the weight of several thousand
centuries, of which you have a vague remembrance and a sorrowful
impression? Whence do we come and whither do we go? All is possible
since all is unknown.

Embrace your beautiful, good mother for me. I shall give myself a
treat, being with you two. Now try to find that hoax on the Celtic
stones; that would interest me very much. When you saw them, had
they opened the galgal of Lockmariaker and cleared away the ground
near Plouharnel?

Those people used to write, because there are stones covered with
hieroglyphics, and they used to work in gold very well, because very
beautifully made torques [Footnote: Gallic necklaces.] have been
found.

My children, who are, like myself, great admirers of you, send you
their compliments, and I kiss your forehead, since Sainte-Beuve
lied.

G. Sand

Have you any sun today? Here it is stifling. The country is lovely.
When will you come here?



XIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Saturday evening, ... 1866

Good, I have it, that beautiful, dear and famous face! I am going to
have a large frame made and hang it on my wall, being able to say,
as did M. de Talleyrand to Louis Philippe: "It is the greatest honor
that my house has received"; a poor phrase, for we two are worth
more than those two amiable men.

Of the two portraits, I like that of Couture's the better. As for
Marchal's he saw in you only "the good woman," but I who am an old
Romantic, find in the other, "the head of the author" who made me
dream so much in my youth.



XX. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Saturday evening, 1866

Your sending the package of the two portraits made me think that you
were in Paris, dear master, and I wrote you a letter which is
waiting for you at rue des Feuillantines.

I have not found my article on the dolmens. But I have my manuscript
(entire) of my trip in Brittany among my "unpublished works." We
shall have to gabble when you are here. Have courage.

I don't experience, as you do, this feeling of a life which is
beginning, the stupefaction of a newly commenced existence. It seems
to me, on the contrary, that I have always lived! And I possess
memories which go back to the Pharaohs. I see myself very clearly at
different ages of history, practising different professions and in
many sorts of fortune. My present personality is the result of my
lost personalities. I have been a boatman on the Nile, a leno in
Rome at the time of the Punic wars, then a Greek rhetorician in
Subura where I was devoured by insects. I died during the Crusade
from having eaten too many grapes on the Syrian shores, I have been
a pirate, monk, mountebank and coachman. Perhaps also even emperor
of the East?

Many things would be explained if we could know our real genealogy.
For, since the elements which make a man are limited, should not the
same combinations reproduce themselves? Thus heredity is a just
principle which has been badly applied.

There is something in that word as in many others. Each one takes it
by one end and no one understands the other. The science of
psychology will remain where it lies, that is to say in shadows and
folly, as long as it has no exact nomenclature, so long as it is
allowed to use the same expression to signify the most diverse
ideas. When they confuse categories, adieu, morale!

Don't you really think that since '89 they wander from the point?
Instead of continuing along the highroad which was broad and
beautiful, like a triumphal way, they stray off by little sidepaths
and flounder in mud holes. Perhaps it would be wise for a little
while to return to Holbach. Before admiring Proudhon, supposing one
knew Turgot? But le Chic, that modern religion, what would become of
it!

Opinions chic (or chiques): namely being pro-Catholicism (without
believing a word of it) being pro-Slavery, being pro-the House of
Austria, wearing mourning for Queen Amelie, admiring Orphee aux
Enfers, being occupied with Agricultural Fairs, talking Sport,
acting indifferent, being a fool up to the point of regretting the
treaties of 1815. That is all that is the very newest.

Oh! You think that because I pass my life trying to make harmonious
phrases, in avoiding assonances, that I too have not my little
judgments on the things of this world? Alas! Yes! and moreover I
shall burst, enraged at not expressing them.

But a truce to joking, I should finally bore you.

The Bouilhet play will open the first part of November. Then in a
month we shall see each other.

I embrace you very warmly, dear master.



XXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, Monday evening, 1 October, 1866

Dear friend,

Your letter was forwarded to me from Paris. It isn't lost. I think
too much of them to let any be lost. You don't speak to me of the
floods, therefore I think that the Seine did not commit any follies
at your place and that the tulip tree did not get its roots wet. I
feared lest you were anxious and wondered if your bank was high
enough to protect you. Here we have nothing of that sort to be
afraid of; our streams are very wicked, but we are far from them.

You are happy in having such clear memories of other existences.
Much imagination and learning--those are your memories; but if one
does not recall anything distinct, one has a very lively feeling of
one's own renewal in eternity. I have a very amusing brother who
often used to say "at the time when I was a dog. ..." He thought
that he had become man very recently. I think that I was vegetable
or mineral. I am not always very sure of completely existing, and
sometimes I think I feel a great fatigue accumulated from having
lived too much. Anyhow, I do not know, and I could not, like you,
say, "I possess the past."

But then you believe that one does not really die, since one LIVES
AGAIN? If you dare to say that to the Smart Set, you have courage
and that is good. I have the courage which makes me pass for an
imbecile, but I don't risk anything; I am imbecile under so many
other counts.

I shall be enchanted to have your written impression of Brittany, I
did not see enough to talk about. But I sought a general impression
and that has served me for reconstructing one or two pictures which
I need. I shall read you that also, but it is still an unformed
mass.

Why did your trip remain unpublished? You are very coy. You don't
find what you do worth being described. That is a mistake. All that
issues from a master is instructive, and one should not fear to show
one's sketches and drawings. They are still far above the reader,
and so many things are brought down to his level that the poor devil
remains common. One ought to love common people more than oneself,
are they not the real unfortunates of the world? Isn't it the people
without taste and without ideals who get bored, don't enjoy anything
and are useless? One has to allow oneself to be abused, laughed at,
and misunderstood by them, that is inevitable. But don't abandon
them, and always throw them good bread, whether or not they prefer
filth; when they are sated with dirt they will eat the bread; but if
there is none, they will eat filth in secula seculorum.

I have heard you say, "I write for ten or twelve people only." One
says in conversation, many things which are the result of the
impression of the moment; but you are not alone in saying that. It
was the opinion of the Lundi or the thesis of that day. I protested
inwardly. The twelve persons for whom you write, who appreciate you,
are as good as you are or surpass you. You never had any need of
reading the eleven others to be yourself. But, one writes for all
the world, for all who need to be initiated; when one is not
understood, one is resigned and recommences. When one is understood,
one rejoices and continues. There lies the whole secret of our
persevering labors and of our love of art. What is art without the
hearts and minds on which one pours it? A sun which would not
project rays and would give life to no one.

After reflecting on it, isn't that your opinion? If you are
convinced of that, you will never know disgust and lassitude, and if
the present is sterile and ungrateful, if one loses all influence,
all hold on the public, even in serving it to the best of one's
ability, there yet remains recourse to the future, which supports
courage and effaces all the wounds of pride. A hundred times in
life, the good that one does seems not to serve any immediate use;
but it keeps up just the same the tradition of wishing well and
doing well, without which all would perish.

Is it only since '89 that people have been floundering? Didn't they
have to flounder in order to arrive at '48 when they floundered much
more, but so as to arrive at what should be? You must tell me how
you mean that and I will read Turgot to please you. I don't promise
to go as far as Holbach, ALTHOUGH HE HAS SOME GOOD POINTS, THE
RUFFIAN!

Summon me at the time of Bouilhet's play. I shall be here, working
hard, but ready to run, and loving you with all my heart. Now that I
am no longer a woman, if the good God was just, I should become a
man; I should have the physical strength and would say to you: "Come
let's go to Carthage or elsewhere." But there, one who has neither
sex nor strength, progresses towards childhood, and it is quite
otherwhere that one is renewed; WHERE? I shall know that before you
do, and, if I can, I shall come back in a dream to tell you.



XXII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 19 October

Dear friend, they write me from the Odeon that Bouilhet's play is on
the 27th. I must be in Paris the 26th. Business calls me in any
event. I shall dine at Magny's on that day, and the next, and the
day after that. Now you know where to find me, for I think that you
will come for the first performance. Yours always, with a full
heart,

G. Sand



XXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 23 October, 1866

Dear friend, since the play is on the 29th I shall give two more
days to my children and I leave here the 28th. You have not told me
if you will dine with me and your friend on the 29th informally, at
Magny's at whatever hour you wish. Let me find a line at 97 rue des
Feuillantines, on the 28th.

Then we shall go to your house, the day you wish. My chief talk with
you will be to listen to you and to love you with all my heart. I
shall bring what I have "ON THE STOCKS." That will GIVE ME COURAGE,
as they say here, to read to you my EMBRYO. If I could only carry
the sun from Nohant. It is glorious.

I embrace and bless you.

G. Sand



XXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 10 November, 1866

On reaching Paris I learn sad news. Last evening, while we were
talking--and I think that we spoke of him day before yesterday--my
friend Charles Duveyrier died, a most tender heart and a most naive
spirit. He is to be buried tomorrow. He was one year older than I
am. My generation is passing bit by bit. Shall I survive it? I don't
ardently desire to, above all on these days of mourning and
farewell. It is as God wills, provided He lets me always love in
this world and in the next.

I keep a lively affection for the dead. But one loves the living
differently. I give you the part of my heart that he had. That
joined to what you have already, makes a large share. It seems to me
that it consoles me to make that gift to you. From a literary point
of view he was not a man of the first rank, one loved him for his
goodness and spontaneity. Less occupied with affairs and philosophy,
he would have had a charming talent. He left a pretty play, Michel
Perrin.

I travelled half the way alone, thinking of you and your mother at
Croisset and looking at the Seine, which thanks to you has become a
friendly GODDESS. After that I had the society of an individual with
two women, as ordinary, all of them, as the music at the pantomime
the other day. Example: "I looked, the sun left an impression like
two points in my eyes." HUSBAND: "That is called luminous points,"
and so on for an hour without stopping.

I shall do all sorts of errands for the house, for I belong to it,
do I not? I am going to sleep, quite worn out; I wept unrestrainedly
all the evening, and I embrace you so much the more, dear friend.
Love me MORE than before, because I am sad.

G. Sand

Have you a friend among the Rouen magistrates? If you have, write
him a line to watch for the NAME Amedee Despruneaux. It is a civil
case which will come up at Rouen in a few days. Tell him that this
Despruneaux is the most honest man in the world; you can answer for
him as for me. In doing this, if the thing is feasible, you will do
me a personal favor. I will do the same for any friend of yours.



XXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
11 November, 1866

I send you my friend Despruneaux in person. If you know a judge or
two,--or if your brother could give him a word of support, do
arrange it, I kiss you three times on each eye.

G. Sand

Five minutes' interview and that's all the inconvenience. Paris,
Sunday



XXVI. TO GEORGE SAND
Monday night

You are sad, poor friend and dear master; it was you of whom I
thought on learning of Duveyrier's death. Since you loved him, I am
sorry for you. That loss is added to others. How we keep these dead
souls in our hearts. Each one of us carries within himself his
necropolis.

I am entirely UNDONE since your departure; it seems to me as if I
had not seen you for ten years. My one subject of conversation with
my mother is you, everyone here loves you. Under what star were you
born, pray, to unite in your person such diverse qualities, so
numerous and so rare?

I don't know what sort of feeling I have for you, but I have a
particular tenderness for you, and one I have never felt for anyone,
up to now. We understood each other, didn't we, that was good.

I especially missed you last evening at ten o'clock. There was a
fire at my wood-seller's. The sky was rose color and the Seine the
color of gooseberry sirup. I worked at the engine for three hours
and I came home as worn out as the Turk with the giraffe.

A newspaper in Rouen, le Nouvelliste, told of your visit to Rouen,
so that Saturday after leaving you I met several bourgeois indignant
at me for not exhibiting you. The best thing was said to me by a
former sub-prefect: "Ah! if we had known that she was here ... we
would have ... we would have ..." he hunted five minutes for the
word; "we would have smiled for her." That would have been very
little, would it not?

To "love you more" is hard for me--but I embrace you tenderly. Your
letter of this morning, so melancholy, reached the BOTTOM of my
heart. We separated at the moment when many things were on the point
of coming to our lips. All the doors between us two are not yet
open. You inspire me with a great respect and I do not dare to
question you.



XXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Paris, 13 November, 1866 Night from Tuesday to Wednesday

I have not yet read my play. I have still something to do over.
Nothing pressing. Bouilhet's play goes admirably well, and they told
me that my little friend Cadol's [Footnote: Edward Cadol, a dramatic
author and a friend of Maurice Sand.] play would come next. And, for
nothing in the world, do I want to step on the body of that child.
That puts me quite a distance off and does not annoy me--NOR INJURE
ME AT ALL. What style! Luckily I am not writing for Buloz.

I saw your friend last evening in the foyer at the Odeon. I shook
hands with him. He had a happy look. And then I talked with
Duquesnel about the fairy play. He wants very much to know it. You
have only to present yourself when ever you wish to busy yourself
with it. You will be received with open arms.

Mario Proth will give me tomorrow or next day the exact date on the
transformation of the journal. Tomorrow I shall go out and buy your
dear mother's shoes. Next week I am going to Palaiseau and I shall
hunt up my book on faience. If I forget anything, remind me of it.

I have been ill for two days. I am cured. Your letter does my heart
good. I shall answer all the questions quite nicely, as you have
answered mine. One is happy, don't you think so, to be able to
relate one's whole life? It is much less complicated than the
bourgeois think, and the mysteries that one can reveal to a friend
are always the contrary of what indifferent ones suppose.

I was very happy that week with you: no care, a good nesting-place a
lovely country, affectionate hearts and your beautiful and frank
face which has a somewhat paternal air. Age has nothing to do with
it. One feels in you the protection of infinite goodness, and one
evening when you called your mother "MY DAUGHTER," two tears came in
my eyes. It was hard to go away, but I hindered your work, and
then,--and then,--a malady of my old age is, not being able to keep
still. I am afraid of getting too attached and of wearying others.
The old ought to be extremely discreet. From a distance I can tell
you how much I love you without the fear of repetition. You are one
of the RARE BEINGS remaining impressionable, sincere, loving art,
not corrupted by ambition, not drunk with success. In short you will
always be twenty-five years of age because of all sorts of ideas
which have become old-fashioned according to the senile young men of
today. With them, I think it is decidedly a pose, but it is so
stupid! If it is a weakness, it is still worse. They are MEN OF
LETTERS and not MEN. Good luck to the novel! It is exquisite; but
oddly enough there is one entire side of you which does not betray
itself in what you do, something that you probably are ignorant of.
That will come later, I am sure of it.

I embrace you tenderly, and your mother too, and the charming niece!
[Footnote: Madame Caroline Commanville.] Ah! I forgot, I saw Couture
this evening; he told me that in order to be nice to you, he would
make your portrait in crayon like mine for whatever price you wish
to arrange. You see I am a good commissioner, use me.



XXVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
16 November, 1866

Thanks, dear friend of my heart, for all the trouble that I gave you
with my Berrichon Despruneaux. They are friends from the old
country, a whole adorable family of fine people, fathers, children,
wives, nephews, all in the close circle at Nohant. He must have been
MOVED at seeing you. He looked forward to it, all personal interest
aside. And I who am not practical, forgot to tell you that the
judgment would not be given for a fortnight. That in consequence any
preceding within the next two weeks would be extremely useful. If he
gains his suit relative to the constructions at Yport, he will
settle there and I shall realize the plan formed long since of going
every year to his house; he has a delicious wife and they have loved
me a long time. You then are threatened with seeing me often
scratching at your gate in passing, giving you a kiss on the
forehead, crying courage for your labor and running on.  I am still
awaiting our information on the journal. It seems that it is a
little difficult to be exact for '42. I have asked for the most
scrupulous exactitude.

For two days I have been taking out to walk my Cascaret, [Footnote:
Francis Laur.] the little engineer of whom I told you. He has become
very good looking, the ladies lift their lorgnons at him, and it
depends only on him to attain the dignity of a negro "giraffier,"
but he loves, he is engaged, he has four years to wait, to work to
make himself a position, and he has made a vow. You would tell him
that he is stupid, I preach to him, on the contrary, my old
troubadour doctrine.

Morality aside, I don't think that the children of this day have
sufficient force to manage at the same time, science and
dissipation, cocottes and engagements. The proof is that nothing
comes from young Bohemia any longer. Good night, friend, work well,
sleep well. Walk a little for the love of God and of me. Tell your
judges who promised me a smile, to smile on my Berrichon.



XXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
16 November, 1866

Don't take any further steps. Contrary to all anticipations,
Despruneaux has gained his suit during the session.

Whether you have done it or not, he is none the less grateful about
it and charges me to thank you with all his good and honest heart.

Bouilhet goes from better to better. I have just seen the directors
who are delighted.

I love you and embrace you.

Think sometimes of your old troubadour. Friday

G. Sand



XXX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
18 November (?), 1866

I think that I shall give you pleasure and joy when I tell you that
La Conjuration d'Ambroise, thus says my porter, is announced as a
real money-maker. There was a line this evening as at Villemer, and
Magny which is also a barometer, shows fair weather.

So be content, if that keeps up, Bouilhet is a success. Sunday

G. S.



XXXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Palaiseau, 22 November, 1866

I think that it will bring me luck to say good evening to my dear
comrade before starting to work.

I am QUITE ALONE in my little house. The gardener and his family
live in the pavilion in the garden and we are the last house at the
end of the village, quite isolated in the country, which is a
ravishing oasis. Fields, woods, appletrees as in Normandy; not a
great river with its steam whistles and infernal chain; a little
stream which runs silently under the willows; a silence ... ah! it
seems to me that I am in the depths of the virgin forest: nothing
speaks except the little jet of the spring which ceaselessly piles
up diamonds in the moonlight. The flies sleeping in the corners of
my room, awaken at the warmth of my fire. They had installed
themselves there to die, they come near the lamp, they are seized
with a mad gaiety, they buzz, they jump, they laugh, they even have
faint inclinations towards love, but it is the hour of death and
paf! in the midst of the dance, they fall stiff. It is over,
farewell to dancing!

I am sad here just the same. This absolute solitude, which has
always been vacation and recreation for me, is shared now by a dead
soul [Footnote: Alexandre Manceau, the engraver,  a friend of
Maurice Sand.] who has ended here, like a lamp which is going out,
yet which is here still. I do not consider him unhappy in the region
where he is dwelling; but the image that he has left near me, which
is nothing more than a reflection, seems to complain because of
being unable to speak to me any more.

Never mind! Sadness is not unhealthy. It prevents us from drying up.
And you dear friend, what are you doing at this hour? Grubbing also,
alone also; for your mother must be in Rouen. Tonight must be
beautiful down there too. Do you sometimes think of the "old
troubadour of the Inn clock, who still sings and will continue to
sing perfect love?" Well! yes, to be sure! You do not believe in
chastity, sir, that's your affair. But as for me, I say that SHE HAS
SOME GOOD POINTS, THE JADE!

And with this, I embrace you with all my heart, and I am going to,
if I can, make people talk who love each other in the old way.

You don't have to write to me when you don't feel like it. No real
friendship without ABSOLUTE liberty.

In Paris next week, and then again to Palaiseau, and after that to
Nohant. I saw Bouilhet at the Monday performance. I am CRAZY about
it. But some of us will applaud at Magny's. I had a cold sweat
there, I who am so steady, and I saw everything quite blue.



XXXII. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Tuesday

You are alone and sad down there, I am the same here.

Whence come these attacks of melancholy that overwhelm one at times?
They rise like a tide, one feels drowned, one has to flee. I lie
prostrate. I do nothing and the tide passes.

My novel is going very badly for the moment. That fact added to the
deaths of which I have heard; of Cormenin (a friend of twenty-five
years' standing), of Gavarni, and then all the rest, but that will
pass. You don't know what it is to stay a whole day with your head
in your hands trying to squeeze your unfortunate brain so as to find
a word. Ideas come very easily with you, incessantly, like a stream.
With me it is a tiny thread of water. Hard labor at art is necessary
for me before obtaining a waterfall. Ah! I certainly know THE
AGONIES OF STYLE.

In short I pass my life in wearing away my heart and brain, that is
the real TRUTH about your friend.

You ask him if he sometimes thinks of his "old troubadour of the
clock," most certainly! and he mourns for him. Our nocturnal talks
were very precious (there were moments when I restrained myself in
order not to KISS you like a big child).

Your ears ought to have burned last night. I dined at my brother's
with all his family. There was hardly any conversation except about
you, and every one sang your praises, unless perhaps myself, I
slandered you as much as possible, dearly beloved master.

I have reread, a propos of your last letter (and by a very natural
connection of ideas), that chapter of father Montaigne's entitled
"some lines from Virgil." What he said of chastity is precisely what
I believe. It is the effort that is fine and not the abstinence in
itself. Otherwise shouldn't one curse the flesh like the Catholics?
God knows whither that would lead. Now at the risk of repetition and
of being a Prudhomme, I insist that your young man is wrong.
[Footnote: Refers to Francis Laur.] If he is temperate at twenty
years old, he will be a cowardly roue at fifty. Everything has its
compensations. The great natures which are good, are above
everything generous and don't begrudge the giving of themselves. One
must laugh and weep, love, work, enjoy and suffer, in short vibrate
as much as possible in all his being.

That is, I think, the real human existence.



XXXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Palaiseau, 29 November, 1866

One need not be spiritualist nor materialist, you say, but one
should be a naturalist. That is a great question.

My Cascaret, that is what I call the little engineer, will decide it
as he thinks best. He is not stupid and he will have many ideas,
deductions and emotions before realizing the prophecy that you make.
I do not catechise him without reserve, for he is stronger than I am
on many points, and it is not Catholic spiritualism that stifles
him. But the question by itself is very serious, and hovers above
our art, above us troubadours, more or less clock-bearing or
clockshaped.

Treat it in an entirely impersonal way; for what is good for one
might be quite the reverse for another. Let us ask ourselves in
making an abstract of our tendencies or of our experiences, if the
human being can receive and seek its own full physical development
without intellectual suffering. Yes, in an ideal and rational
society that would be so. But, in that in which we live and with
which we must be content, do not enjoyment and excess go hand in
hand, and can one separate them or limit them, unless one is a sage
of the first class? And if one is a sage, farewell temptation which
is the father of real joys.

The question for us artists, is to know if abstinence strengthens us
or if it exalts us too much, which state would degenerate into
weakness,--You will say, "There is time for everything and power
enough for every dissipation of strength." Then you make a
distinction and you place limits, there is no way of doing
otherwise. Nature, you think, places them herself and prevents us
from abusing her. Ah! but no, she is not wiser than we who are also
nature.

Our excesses of work, as our excesses of pleasure, kill us
certainly, and the more we are great natures, the more we pass
beyond bounds and extend the limits of our powers.

No, I have no theories. I spend my life in asking questions and in
hearing them answered in one way or another without any victoriously
conclusive reply ever being given me. I await the brilliance of a
new state of my intellect and of my organs in a new life; for, in
this one, whosoever reflects, embraces up to their last
consequences, the limits of pro and con. It is Monsieur Plato, I
think, who asked for and thought he held the bond. He had it no more
than we. However, this bond exists, since the universe subsists
without the pro and con, which constitute it, reciprocally
destroying each other. What shall one call it in material nature?
EQUILIBRIUM, that will do, and for spiritual nature? MODERATION,
relative chastity, abstinence from excess, whatever you want, but
that is translated by EQUILIBRIUM; am I wrong, my master?

Consider it, for in our novels, what our characters do or do not do,
rests only on that. Will they or will they not possess the object of
their ardent desires? Whether it is love or glory, fortune or
pleasure, ever since they existed, they have aspired to one end. If
we have a philosophy in us, they walk right according to us; if we
have not, they walk by chance, and are too much dominated by the
events which we put in the way of their legs. Imbued by our own
ideas and ruled by fatality, they do not always appear logical.
Should we put much or little of ourselves in them? Shouldn't we put
what society puts in each one of us?

For my part, I follow my old inclination, I put myself in the skin
of my good people. People scold me for it, that makes no difference.
You, I don't really know if by method or by instinct, take another
course. What you do, you succeed in; that is why I ask you if we
differ on the question of internal struggles, if the hero ought to
have any or if he ought not to know them.

You always astonish me with your painstaking work; is it a coquetry?
It does not seem labored. What I find difficult is to choose out of
the thousand combinations of scenic action which can vary
infinitely, the clear and striking situation which is not brutal nor
forced. As for style, I attach less importance to it than you do.

The wind plays my old harp as it lists. It has its HIGH NOTES, its
LOW NOTES, its heavy notes--and its faltering notes, in the end it
is all the same to me provided the emotion comes, but I can find
nothing in myself. It is THE OTHER who sings as he likes, well or
ill, and when I try to think about it, I am afraid and tell myself
that I am nothing, nothing at all. But a great wisdom saves us; we
know how to say to ourselves, "Well, even if we are absolutely
nothing but instruments, it is still a charming state and like no
other, this feeling oneself vibrate."

Now, let the wind blow a little over your strings. I think that you
take more trouble than you need, and that you ought to let THE OTHER
do it oftener. That would go just as well and with less fatigue.

The instrument might sound weak at certain moments, but the breeze
in continuing would increase its strength. You would do afterwards
what I don't do, what I should do. You would raise the tone of the
whole picture and would cut out what is too uniformly in the light.

Vale et me ama.



XXXIV. TO GEORGE SAND
Saturday morning

Don't bother yourself about the information relative to the
journals. That will occupy little space in my book and I have time
to wait. But when you have nothing else to do, jot down on paper
whatever you can recall of '48. Then you can develop it in talking.
I don't ask you for copy of course, but to collect a little of your
personal memories.

Do you know an actress at the Odeon who plays Macduff in Macbeth?
Dugueret? She would like to have the role of Nathalie in Mont-
reveche. She will be recommended to you by Girardin, Dumas and me. I
saw her yesterday in Faustine, in which she showed talent. My
opinion is that she has intelligence and that one could profit by
her.

If your little engineer has made a VOW, and if that vow does not
cost him anything, he is right to keep it; if not, it is pure folly,
between you and me. Where should liberty exist if not in passion?

Well! no, IN MY DAY we didn't take such vows and we loved! and
swaggeringly. But all participated in a great eclecticism and when
one strayed FROM LADIES it was from pride, in defiance of one's
self, and for effect. In short, we were Red Romantics, perfectly
ridiculous to be sure, but in full bloom. The little good which
remains to me comes from that epoch.



XXXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Palaiseau, 30 November, 1866

There would be a good deal to say on all that, my comrade. My
Cascaret, that is to say, the fiance in question, keeps himself for
his fiancee. She said to him, "Let us wait till you have
accomplished certain definite work," and he works. She said to him,
"Let us keep ourselves pure for each other," and he keeps himself
pure. It is not that he is choked by Catholic spiritualism; but he
has a high ideal of love, and why counsel him to go and lose it when
his conscience and his honor depend on keeping it?

There is an equilibrium which Nature, our ruler, herself puts in our
instincts, and she sets the limit to our appetites. Great natures
are not the most robust. We are not developed in all our senses by a
very logical education. We are compressed in every way, and we
thrust out our roots and branches when and how we can. Great artists
are often weak also, and many are impotent. Some too strong in
desire are quickly exhausted. In general I think that we have too
intense joys and sorrows, we who work with our brains. The laborer
who works his land and his wife hard by day and night is not a
forceful nature. His brain is very feeble. You say to develop one's
self in every direction? Come, not all at the same time, not without
rest.

Those who brag of that, are bluffing a bit, or IF THEY DO
everything, do everything ill. If love for them is a little bread-
and-butter and art a little pot-boiler, all right; but if their
pleasure is great, verging on the infinite, and their work eager,
verging on enthusiasm, they do not alternate these as in sleeping
and waking.

As for me, I don't believe in these Don Juans who are Byrons at the
same time. Don Juan did not make poems and Byron made, so they say,
very poor love. He must have had sometimes--one can count such
emotions in one's life--a complete ecstasy of heart, mind and
senses. He knew enough about them to be one of the poets of love.
Nothing else is necessary for the instrument of our vibration. The
continual wind of little appetites breaks them.

Try some day to write a novel in which the artist (the real artist)
is the hero, you will see what great, but delicate and restrained,
vigor is in it, how he will see everything with an attentive eye,
curious and tranquil, and how his infatuations with the things he
examines and delves into, will be rare and serious. You will see
also how he fears himself, how he knows that he can not surrender
himself without exhaustion, and how a profound modesty in regard to
the treasures of his soul prevents him from scattering and wasting
them.

The artist is such a fine type to do, that I have never dared really
to do him. I do not consider myself worthy to touch that beautiful
and very complicated figure; that is aiming too high for a mere
woman. But if it could certainly tempt you some day, it would be
worth while.

Where is the model? I don't know, I have never REALLY known any one
who did not show some spot in the sunlight, I mean some side where
the artist verged on the Philistine. Perhaps you have not that spot;
you ought to paint yourself. As for me I have it. I love
classifications, I verge on the pedagogue. I love to sew and to care
for children, I verge on the servant. I am easily distracted and
verge on the idiot. And then I should not like perfection; I feel it
but I shouldn't know how to show it.

But one could give him some faults in his nature. What ones? We
shall hunt for them some day. That is not really what you are
working on now and I ought not to distract you from it.

Be less cruel to yourself. Go ahead and when the afflatus shall have
produced everything you must elevate the general tone and cut out
what ought not to come down front stage. Can't that be done? It
seems to me that it can. What you do appears so easy, so abundant!
It is a perpetual overflow, I do not understand your anguish.  Good
night, dear brother, my love to all yours. I have returned to my
solitude at Palaiseau, I love it. I leave it for Paris, Monday. I
embrace you warmly. Good luck to your work.

G. Sand



XXXVI. Monsieur Gustave Flobert at Croisset,
Rouen [The postage stamp bears the mark, Paris, 4, December, 1866]

Sir the noise that you make in literature by your distinguished
talent I also made in my day in the manner that my means permitted
me I began in 1804 under the auspices of the celebrated Madame Saqui
and bore off palms and left memories in the annals of the tight-rope
and coregrafie balancer in all countries where I have been there
appreciated by generals and other officers of the Empire by whom I
have been solicited up to an advanced age so that wives of prefects
and ministers could not have been complimented about it I have read
your distinguished works notably Madame Bovarie of which I think I
am capable of being a model to you when she breaks the chains of her
feet to go where her heart calls her. I am well preserved for my
advanced age and if you have a repugnance for an artist in
misfortune, I should be content with your ideal sentiments. You can
then count on my heart not being able to dispose of my person being
married to a man of light character who squandered my wax cabinet
wherein were all figures of celebrities, kings, emperors, ancient
and modern and celebrated crimes, which if I had had your permission
about it you would have been placed in the number I had then a place
in the railroad substation to have charge of the cabinets which the
jealousy of my rival made me lose, it is in these sentiments that I
write you if you deign to write the history of my unhappy life you
alone would be worthy of it and would see in it things of which you
would be worthy of appreciating I shall present myself at your house
in Rouen whose address I had from M. Bouilhet who knows me well
having come to see me in his youth he will tell you that I have the
phthisic still agreeably and always faithful to all who knew me
whether in the civil or in the military and in these sentiments for
life your affectionate

Victoire Potelet

called Marengo Lirondelle widow Dodin
Rue Lanion, 47, Belleville.



XXXVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday night, 5th December, 1866

Oh! how lovely the letter of Marengo the Swallow is! Seriously, I
think it a masterpiece, not a word which is not a word of genius. I
have laughed aloud many times. I thank you very dear master, you are
as good as can be.

You never tell me what you are doing. How far has the play gone?

I am not at all surprised that you don't understand my literary
agonies. I don't understand them myself. But they exist
nevertheless, and violent ones.

I don't in the least know how to set to work to write, and I begin
by expressing only the hundredth part of my ideas after infinite
gropings. Not one who seizes the first impulse, your friend, no! not
at all! Thus for entire days I have polished and re-polished a
paragraph without accomplishing anything. I feel like weeping at
times. You ought to pity me!

As for our subject under discussion (a propos of your young man),
what you write me in your last letter is so my way of thinking, that
I have not only practised it but preached it. Ask Theo. However, let
us understand one another. Artists (who are priests) risk nothing in
being chaste; on the contrary. But the bourgeois, what is the use in
it for them? Of course there must be certain ones among humanity who
stick to chastity. Happy indeed those who don't depart from it.

I don't agree with you that there is anything worth while to be done
with the character of the IDEAL ARTIST; he would be a monster. Art
is not made to paint the exceptions, and I feel an unconquerable
repugnance to putting on paper something from out of my heart. I
even think that a novelist HASN'T THE RIGHT TO EXPRESS HIS OPINION
on any subject whatsoever. Has the good God ever uttered it, his
opinion? That is why there are not a few things that choke me which
I should like to spit out, but which I swallow. Why say them, in
fact! The first comer is more interesting than Monsieur Gustave
Flaubert, because he is more GENERAL and therefore more typical.

Nevertheless, there are days when I consider myself below
imbecility. I have still a globe of goldfish and that amuses me.
They keep me company while I dine. Is it stupid to be interested in
such simple things? Adieu, it is late, I have an aching head.

I embrace you.



XXXVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT,
at Paris December, 1866

"Not put one's heart into what one writes?" I don't understand at
all, oh! not at all! As for me, I think that one can not put
anything else into it. Can one separate one's mind from one's heart?
Is it something different? Can sensation itself limit itself? Can
existence divide itself? In short, not to give oneself entirely to
one's work, seems to me as impossible as to weep with something else
than one's eyes, and to think with something else than one's brain.

What was it you meant? You must tell me when you have the time.



XXXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 8 December, 1866

You ask me what I am doing? Your old troubadour is content this
evening. He has passed the night in re-doing a second act which did
not go properly and which has turned out well, so well that my
directors are delighted, and I have good hopes of making the end
effective--it does not please me yet, but one must pull it through.
In short, I have nothing to tell you about myself which is very
interesting. When one has the patience of an ox and the wrist broken
from crushing stones well or badly, one has scarcely any unexpected
events or emotions to recount. My poor Manceau called me the ROAD-
MENDER, and there is nothing less poetic than those beings.

And you, dear friend, are you experiencing the anguish and labors of
childbirth? That is splendid and youthful. Those who want them don't
always get them!

When my daughter-in-law brings into the world dear little children,
I abandon myself to such labor in holding her in my arms that it
reacts on me, and when the infant arrives, I am sicker than she is,
and even seriously so. I think that your pains now react on me, and
I have a headache on account of them. But alas! I cannot assist at
any birth and I almost regret the time when one believed it hastened
deliverances to burn candles before an image.

I see that that rascal Bouilhet has betrayed me; he promised me to
copy the Marengo letter in a feigned hand to see if you would be
taken in by it. People have written to me seriously things like
that. How good and kind your great friend is. He is adored at the
Odeon, and this evening they told me that his play was going better
and better. I went to hear it again two or three days ago and I was
even more delighted with it than the first time.

Well, well, let's keep up our heart, whatever happens, and when you
go to rest remember that someone loves you. Affectionate regards to
your mother, brother and niece.

G. Sand



XL. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Saturday night

I have seen Citizen Bouilhet, who had a real ovation in his own
country. His compatriots who had absolutely ignored him up to then,
from the moment that Paris applauded him, screamed with enthusiasm.-
-He will return here Saturday next, for a banquet that they are
giving him,--80 covers, at least.

As for Marengo the Swallow, he kept your secret so well, that he
read the letter in question with an astonishment which duped me.

Poor Marengo! she is a figure! and one that you ought to put in a
book. I wonder what her memoirs would be, written in that style?--
Mine (my style) continues to give me no small annoyance. I hope,
however, in a month, to have crossed the most barren tract. But at
the moment I am lost in a desert; well, by the grace of God, so much
the worse for me! How gladly I shall abandon this sort of thing,
never to return to it to my dying day! Depicting the modern French
bourgeois is a stench in my nostrils! And then won't it be time
perhaps to enjoy oneself a bit in life, and to choose subjects
pleasant to the author?

I expressed myself badly when I said to you that "one should not
write from the heart." I meant to say: not put one's personality
into the picture. I think that great art is scientific and
impersonal. One should, by an effort of mind, put oneself into one's
characters and not create them after oneself. That is the method at
least; a method which amounts to this: try to have a great deal of
talent and even of genius if you can. How vain are all the poetic
theories and criticisms!--and the nerve of the gentlemen who compose
them sickens me. Oh! nothing restrains them, those boneheads!

Have you noticed that there is sometimes in the air a current of
common ideas? For instance, I have just read my friend Du Camp's new
novel: Forces Perdues. It is very like what I am doing, in many
ways. His book is very naive and gives an accurate idea of the men
of our generation having become real fossils to the young men of
today. The reaction of '48 opened a deep chasm between the two
Frances.

Bouilhet told me that you had been seriously ill at one of the
recent Magny's, although you do pretend to be a "woman of wood." Oh!
no you are not of wood, dear good great heart! "Beloved old
troubadour," would it not perhaps be opportune to rehabilitate him
at the Theatre Almanzor? I can see him with his toque and his guitar
and his apricot tunic howling at the black-gowned students from the
top of a rock. The talk would be fine. Now, good night; I kiss you
on both cheeks tenderly.



XLI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 7 December, 1866

Something like a week ago someone came to my house in the morning to
ask me the address of the bootmaker, my maid did not want to awaken
me, and it was not until noon that I read the letter; the bearer
said he came from the Hotel Helder on the rue Helder. I answered at
once that Simonin lived at 15 rue Richelieu, I wrote to your mother
thinking that it was she who wrote to me. I see that she did not
receive my note and I don't understand about it, but it is not my
fault.

Your old Troubadour is sick as a dog again today, but it will not
prevent him from going to Magny's this evening. He could not die in
better company; although he would prefer the edge of a ditch in the
spring.

Everything else goes well and I leave for Nohant on Saturday.  I am
trying hard to push the entomological work which Maurice is
publishing. It is very fine.

I am doing for him what I have never done for myself. I am writing
to the newspaper men.

I shall recommend Mademoiselle Bosquet to whom I can, but that
appeals to another public, and I don't stand in as well with the
literary men as I do with the scholars. But certainly Marengo the
Swallow MUST BE DONE and the apricot troubadour also. All that was
of the Cadios of the revolution who began to be or who wanted to be
something, no matter what. I am of the last comers and you others
born of us, you are between the illusions of my time and the crude
deception of the new times. It is quite natural that Du Camp should
go parallel with you in a series of observations and ideas, that
does not mean anything. There will be no resemblance.

Oh no! I have not found a title for you, it is too serious, and then
I should need to know everything. In any case I am no good today to
do anything except to draw up my epitaph. Et in Arcadia ego, you
know, I love you, dear friend brother, and bless you with all my
heart.

G. Sand
Monday.



XLII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Paris, 9 January, 1867

Dear comrade,

Your old troubadour has been tempted to bite the dust. He is still
in Paris. He should have left the 25th of December; his trunk was
strapped; your first letter was awaiting him every day at Nohant. At
last he is all ready to leave and he goes tomorrow with his son
Alexandre [Footnote: Alexandre Dumas fils.] who is anxious to
accompany him.

It is stupid to be laid on one's back and to lose consciousness for
three days and to get up as enfeebled as if one had done something
painful and useful. It was nothing after all, except temporary
impossibility of digesting anything whatever. Cold, or weakness, or
work, I don't know. I don't think of it any longer. Sainte-Beuve is
much more disquieting, somebody have written you about it. He is
better also, but there will be serious trouble, and on account of
that, accidents to look out for. I am very saddened and anxious
about it.

I have not worked for two weeks; so my task has not progressed very
much, and as I don't know if I am going to be in shape very soon, I
have given the Odeon A VACATION. They will take me when I am ready.
I think of going a little to the south when I have seen my children.
The plants of the coast are running through my head. I am
prodigiously uninterested in anything which is not my little ideal
of peaceful work, country life, and of tender and pure friendship. I
really think that I am not going to live a long time, although I am
quite cured and well. I get this warning from the great calm,
CONTINUALLY CALMER, which exists in my formerly agitated soul. My
brain only works from synthesis to analysis, and formerly it was the
contrary. Now, what presents itself to my eyes when I awaken is the
planet; I have considerable trouble in finding again there the MOI
which interested me formerly, and which I begin to' call YOU in the
plural. It is charming, the planet, very interesting, very curious
but rather backward, and as yet somewhat unpractical; I hope to pass
into an oasis with better highways and possible to all. One needs so
much money and resources in order to travel here! and the time lost
in order to procure. these necessaries is lost to study and to
contemplation. It seems to me that there is due me something less
complicated, less civilized, more naturally luxurious, and more
easily good than this feverish halting-place. Will you come into the
land, of my dreams, if I succeed in finding the road? Ah! who can
know?

And the novel, is it getting on? Your courage has not declined?
Solitude does not weigh on you? I really think that it is not
absolute, and that somewhere there is a sweetheart who comes and
goes, or who lives near there. But there is something of the
anchorite in your life just the same, and if envy your situation. As
for me, I am too alone at Palaiseau, with a dead soul; not alone
enough at Nohant, with the children whom I love too much to belong
to myself,--and at Paris, one does not know what one is, one forgets
oneself entirely for a thousand things which are not worth any more
than oneself. I embrace you with all my heart, dear friend; remember
me to your mother, to your dear family, and write me at Nohant, that
will do me good.

The cheeses? I don't know at all, it seems to me that they spoke to
me of them, but I don't remember at all. I will tell you that from
down there.



XLIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Saturday night

No, dear master, you are not near your end. So much the worse for
you perhaps. But you will live to be old, very old, as giants live,
since you are of that race: only you MUST rest. One thing astonishes
me and that is that you have not died twenty times over, having
thought so much, written so much and suffered so much. Do go then,
since you have the desire, to the Mediterranean. Its azure sky
quiets and invigorates. There are the Countries of Youth, such as
the Bay of Naples. Do they make one sadder sometimes? I do not know.

Life is not easy! What a complicated and extravagant affair! I know
something about that. One must have money for everything! So that
with a modest revenue and an unproductive profession one has to make
up one's mind to have but little. So I do! The habit is formed, but
the days that work does not go well are not amusing. Yes indeed! I
would love to follow you into another planet. And a propos of money,
it is that which will make our planet uninhabitable in the near
future, for it will be impossible to live here, even for the rich,
without looking after one's property; one will have to spend several
hours a day fussing over one's INCOME. Charming! I continue to fuss
over my novel, and I shall go to Paris when I reach the end of my
chapter, towards the middle of next month.

And whatever you suspect, no "lovely lady" comes to see me. Lovely
ladies have occupied my mind a good deal, but have taken up very
little of my time. Applying the term anchorite to me is perhaps a
juster comparison than you think.

I pass entire weeks without exchanging a word with a human being,
and at the end of the week it is not possible for me to recall a
single day nor any event whatsoever. I see my mother and my niece on
Sundays, and that is all. My only company consists of a band of rats
in the garret, which make an infernal racket above my head, when the
water does not roar or the wind blow. The nights are black as ink,
and a silence surrounds me comparable to that of the desert.
Sensitiveness is increased immeasurably in such a setting. I have
palpitations of the heart for nothing.

All that results from our charming profession. That is what it means
to torment the soul and the body. But perhaps this torment is our
proper lot here below?

I told you, didn't I, that I had reread Consuelo and the Comtesse de
Rudolstadt; it took me four days. We must discuss them at length,
when you are willing. Why am I in love with Siverain? Perhaps
because I am of both sexes.



XLIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT at Croissset
Nohant, 15 January, 1867

Here I am at home, fairly strong except for several hours during the
evening. Yet, THAT WILL PASS. THE EVIL OR HE WHO ENDURES IT, my old
cure used to say, CAN NOT LAST. I received your letter this morning,
dear friend of my heart. Why do I love you more than most of the
others, even more than old and well-tried friends? I am asking, for
my condition at this hour, is that of being

THOU WHO GOEST SEEKING,
AT SUNSET,
FORTUNE! ...

Yes, intellectual fortune, LIGHT! Oh well, here it is: one gets,
being old, at the sunset of life,--which is the most beautiful hour
of tones and reflections,--a new idea of everything and of affection
above all.

In the age of power and of personality, one tests one's friends as
one tests the earth, from the point of view of reciprocity. One
feels oneself solid, one wants to find that which bears one or leads
one, solid. But, when one feels the intensity of the moi fleeing,
one loves persons and things for what they are in themselves, for
what they represent in the eyes of one's soul, and not at all for
what they add further to one's destiny. It is like the picture or
the statue which one would like to own, when one dreams at the same
time of a beautiful house of one's own in which to put it.

But one has passed through green Bohemia without gathering anything
there; one has remained poor, sentimental and troubadourish. One
knows very well that it will always be the same, and that one will
die without a hearth or a home. Then one thinks of the statue, of
the picture which one would not know what to do with and which one
would not know where to place with due honor, if one owned it. One
is content to know that they are in some temple not profaned by cold
analysis, a little far from the eye, and one loves them so much the
more. One says: I will go again to the country where they are. I
shall see again and I shall love always that which has made me love
and understand them. The contact of my personality will not have
changed them, it will not be myself that I shall love in them.

And it is thus, truly, that the ideal which one does not dream of
grasping, fixes itself in one because it remains ITSELF. That is all
the secret of the beautiful, of the only truth, of love, friendship,
of art, of enthusiasm, and of faith. Consider it, you will see.

That solitude in which you live would be delicious to me in fine
weather. In winter I find it stoical, and am forced to recall to
myself that you have not the moral need of locomotion AS A HABIT. I
used to think that was another expenditure of strength during this
season of being shut in;--well, it is very fine, but it must not
continue indefinitely; if the novel has to last longer, you must
interrupt it, or vary it with distractions. Really, my dear friend,
think of the life of the body, which gets upset and nervous when you
subdue it too much. When I was ill in Paris, I saw a physician, very
mad, but very intelligent, who said very true things on that
subject. He said that I SPIRITUALIZED myself in a disquieting
manner, and when I told him, exactly, a propos of you, that one
could abstract oneself from everything except work, and have more
rather than less strength, he answered that the danger was as great
in accumulating as in losing, and a propos of this, many excellent
things which I wish I could repeat to you.

Besides, you know them, but you never pay any attention to them.
Then this work which you abuse so in words, is a passion, and a
great one! Now, I shall tell you what you tell me. For our sake and
for the sake of your old troubadour, do SPARE yourself a little.

Consuelo, La Comtesse de Rudolstadt, what are they? Are they mine? I
don't recall a single word in them. You are reading that, you? Are
you really amused? Then I shall read them one of these days and I
shall love myself if you love me.

What is being hysterical? I have perhaps been that also, I am
perhaps; but I don't know anything about it, never having profoundly
studied the thing, and having heard of it without having studied it.
Isn't it an uneasiness, an anguish caused by the desire of an
impossible SOMETHING OR OTHER? In that case, we are all attacked by
it, by this strange illness, when we have imagination; and why
should such a malady have a sex?

And still further, there is this for those strong in anatomy: THERE
IS ONLY ONE SEX. A man and a woman are so entirely the same thing,
that one hardly understands the mass of distinctions and of subtle
reasons with which society is nourished concerning this subject. I
have observed the infancy and the development of my son and my
daughter. My son was myself, therefore much more woman, than my
daughter, who was an imperfect man.

I embrace you. Maurice and Lina who have tasted your cheese, send
you their regards, and Mademoiselle Aurore cries to you, WAIT, WAIT,
WAIT! That is all that she knows how to say while laughing like a
crazy person; for, at heart she is serious, attentive, clever with
her hands as a monkey and amusing herself better with games she
invents, than with those one suggests to her. I think that she will
have a mind of her own.

If I do not get cured here, I shall go to Cannes, where some friends
are urging me to come. But I can not yet mention it to my children.
When I am with them it is not easy to move. There is passion and
jealousy. And all my life has been like that, never my own! Pity
yourself then, you who belong to yourself!



XLV. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday evening

I have followed your counsel, dear master, I have EXERCISED!!! Am I
not splendid; eh?

Sunday night, at eleven o'clock, there was such lovely moonlight
along the river and on the snow that I was taken with an itch for
movement, and I walked for two hours and a half imagining all sorts
of things, pretending that I was travelling in Russia or in Norway.
When the tide came in and cracked the cakes of ice in the Seine and
the thin ice which covered the stream, it was, without any
exaggeration, superb. Then I thought of you and I missed you.

I don't like to eat alone. I have to associate the idea with someone
with the things that please me. But this someone is rare. I too
wonder why I love you. Is it because you are a great man or a
charming being? I don't know. What is certain is that I experience a
PARTICULAR sentiment for you and I cannot define it.

And a propos of this, do you think (you who are a master of
psychology), that one can love two people in the same way and that
one can experience two identical sensations about them? I don't
think so, since our individuality changes at every moment of its
existence.

You write me lovely things about "disinterested affection." That is
true, so is the opposite! We make God always in our own image. At
the bottom of all our loves and all our admirations we find
ourselves again: ourselves or something approaching us. What is the
difference if the OURSELVES is good!

My moi bores me for the moment. How this fool weighs on my shoulders
at times! He writes too slowly and is not bluffing at all when he
complains of his work. What a task! and what a devil of an idea to
have sought such a subject! You should give me a recipe for going
faster: and you complain of seeking a fortune! You! I have received
a little note from Saint-Beuve which reassures about his health, but
it is sad. He seemed to me depressed at not being able to haunt the
dells of Cyprus.  He is within the truth, or at least within his own
truth, which amounts to the same thing. I shall be like him perhaps,
when I am his age. However, I think not. Not having had the same
youth, my old age will be different.

That reminds me that I once dreamed a book on Saint Perrine.
Champfleury treated that subject badly. For I don't see that he is
comic: I should have made him atrocious and lamentable. I think that
the heart does not grow old; there are even people whose hearts grow
bigger with age. I was much drier and more bitter twenty years ago
than now. I am feminized and softened by wear, as others get harder,
and that makes me INDIGNANT. I feel that I am becoming a COW, it
takes nothing to move me; everything troubles and agitates me,
everything is to me as the north wind is to the reed.

A word from you, which I remembered, has made me reread now the Fair
Maid of Perth. It is a good story, whatever one says about it. That
fellow decidedly had an imagination.

Well, adieu. Think of me. I send you my best love.



XLVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 1867

Bah! zut! troulala! Well! well! I am not sick any more, or at least
I am only half sick. The air of the country restores me, or
patience, or THE OTHER person, the one who wants to work again and
to produce. What is my illness? Nothing. Everything is all right,
but I have something that they call anemia, an effect without a
tangible cause, a breakdown which has been threatening for several
years, and which became noticeable at Palaiseau, after my return
from Croisset. An emaciation that is too rapid to be within reason,
a pulse too slow, too feeble, an indolent or capricious stomach,
with a sensation of stifling and a fondness for inertia. I was not
able to keep a glass of water on my poor stomach for several days,
and that brought me so low that I thought I was hardly curable; but,
all is getting on, and I have even been working since yesterday.

You, dear, you go walking in the night, in the snow. That is
something which for an exceptional excursion, is rather foolish and
might indeed make you ill also. Good Heavens! It is not the moon, it
is the sun that I advise; we are not owls, OBVIOUSLY! We have just
had three spring days. I wager that you have not climbed up to my
dear orchard which is so pretty and which I love so much. If it was
only in remembrance of me, you ought to climb up every fine day at
noon. Your work would flow more abundantly afterward and you would
regain the time you lost and more too.

Then you are worrying about money? I don't know what that is, since
I have not a sou in the world. I live by my day, work as does the
proletarian; when I can no longer do my day's work, I shall be
packed up for the other world, and then I shall have no more need of
anything. But you must live. How can you live by your pen if you
always let yourself be duped and shorn? It is not I who can teach
you how to protect yourself But haven't you a friend who knows how
to act for you? Alas, yes, the world is going to the devil in that
respect; and I was talking of you, the other day, to a very dear
friend, while I was showing him the artist, a personage become so
rare, and cursing the necessity of thinking of the material side of
life. I send you the last page of his letter; you will see that you
have in him a friend whom you did not suspect, and whose name will
surprise you.

No, I shall not go to Cannes, in spite of a strong temptation!
Imagine, I received a little box filled with flowers gathered out-
doors, five or six days ago; for the package followed me to Paris
and to Palaiseau. Those flowers are adorably fresh, they smell
sweetly, they are as pretty as anything.--Ah! to go, go at once to
the country of the sun. But I have no money, and besides I have no
time. My illness has delayed me and put me off. Let us stay here. Am
I not well? If I can't go to Paris next month, won't you come to see
me here? Certainly, it is an eight hours' journey. You can not see
this ancient nook. You owe me a week, or I shall believe that I love
a big ingrate who does not pay me back.

Poor Sainte-Beuve! More unhappy than we, he who has never had any
great disappointments and who has no longer any material worries. He
bewails what is the least regrettable and the least serious in life
understood as he understood it! And then very proud, having been a
Jansenist, his heart has cooled in that direction. Perhaps the
intelligence was developed, but that does not suffice to make us
live, and does not teach us how to die. Barbes, who has expected for
a long time that a stroke would carry him off, is gentle and
smiling. It does not seem to him, and it does not seem to his
friends, that death will separate him from us. He who quite goes
away, is he who believes he ends and does not extend a hand so that
anyone can follow him or rejoin him.

And good-night, dear friend of my heart. They are ringing for the
performance. Maurice regales us this evening with marionettes. They
are very amusing, and the theatre is so pretty! A real artist's
jewel. Why aren't you here? It is horrid not to live next door to
those one loves.



XLVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday

I received yesterday your son's book. I shall start it when I have
gotten rid of less amusing readings, probably. Meanwhile, don't
thank him any the less, dear master.

First, let's talk of you; "arsenic." I am sure of it! You must drink
iron, walk, and sleep, and go to the south, no matter what it costs,
there! Otherwise the WOODEN WOMAN will break down. As for money, we
shall find it; and as for the time, take it. You won't do anything
that I advise, of course. Oh! well, you are wrong, and you hurt me.

No, I have not what you call worries about money; my revenues are
very small, but they are sure. Only, as it is your friend's habit to
anticipate them he finds himself short at times, and he grumbles "in
the silence of his closet," but not elsewhere. Unless I have
extraordinary reverses, I shall have enough to feed me and warm me
until the end of my days. My heirs are or will be rich (for it is I
who am the poor one of the family). Then, zut!

As for gaining money by my pen, that is an aspiration that I have
never had, recognizing that I was radically incapable of it.

I have to live as a small retired countryman, which is not very
amusing. But so many others who are worth more than I am not having
the land, it would be unfair for me to complain. Accusing Providence
is, moreover a mania so common, that one ought to refrain from it
through simple good taste.

Another word about money and one that shall be quite between
ourselves. I can, without being inconvenienced at all, as soon as I
am in Paris, that is to say from the 20th to the 23rd of the present
month, lend you a thousand francs, if you need them in order to go
to Cannes. I make you this proposition bluntly, as I would to
Bouilhet, or any other intimate friend. Come, don't stand on
ceremony!

Between people in society, that would not be correct, I know that,
but between troubadours many things are allowable.

You are very kind with your invitation to go to Nohant. I shall go,
for I want very much to see your house. I am annoyed not to know it
when I think of you. But I shall have to put off that pleasure till
next summer. Now I have to stay some time in Paris. Three months are
not too long for all I want to do there.

I send you back the page from the letter of your friend Barbes,
whose real biography I know very imperfectly. All I know of him is
that he is honest and heroic. Give him a hand-shake for me, to thank
him for his sympathy. Is he, BETWEEN OURSELVES, as intelligent as he
is good?

I feel the importance now, of getting men of that class to be rather
frank with me. For I am going to start studying the Revolution of
'48. You have promised me to hunt in your library at Nohant for (1)
an article of yours on faience; (2) a novel by father X---, a
Jesuit, on the Holy Virgin.

But what sternness for the father Beuve who is neither Jesuit nor
virgin! He regrets, you say, "what is the least regrettable,
understood as he understood it." Why so? Everything depends upon the
intensity that one puts on the thing.

Men always find that the most serious thing of their existence is
enjoyment.

Woman for us all is the highest point of the infinite. That is not
noble, but that is the real depth of the male. They exaggerate that
unmercifully, God be thanked, for literature and for individual
happiness also.

Oh! I have missed you so much. The tides are superb, the wind
groans, the river foams and overflows. It blows from the ocean,
which benefits one.



XLVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Paris
Nohant, 8 February, 1867

No, I am not Catholic, but I reject monstrosities. I say that the
hideous old man who buys young girls does not make love and that
there is in it neither death nor birth, nor infinity, nor male nor
female. It is a thing against nature; for it is not desire that
drives the young girl into the arms of the ugly old man, and where
there is not liberty nor reciprocity there is an attack against holy
nature. Therefore that which he regrets is not regrettable, unless
he thinks that his little cocottes will regret his person, and I ask
you if they will regret anything else than their dirty wages? That
was the gangrene in this great and admirable mind, so lucid and so
wise on all other subjects. One pardons everything in those one
loves, when one is obliged to defend them from their enemies. But
what we say between ourselves is buried, and I can tell you that
vice has quite spoiled my old friend.

We must believe that we love one another a great deal, dear comrade,
for we both had the same thought at the same time. You offer me a
thousand francs with which to go to Cannes; you who are as hard up
as I am, and, when you wrote to me that you WERE BOTHERED about
money matters, I opened my letter again, to offer you half of what I
have, which still amounts to about two thousand francs; it is my
reserve. And then I did not dare. Why? It is quite stupid; you were
better than I, you came straight to the point. Well, I thank you for
that kind thought and I do not accept. But I would accept, be sure
of it, if I did not have other resources. Only I tell you that if
anyone ought to lend to me, it is Buloz who has bought chateaux and
lands with my novels. He would not refuse me, I know. He even offers
it to me. I shall take from him then, if I have to. But I am not in
a condition to leave, I have had a relapse these last few days. I
slept thirty-six hours together, exhausted. Now I am on my feet
again, but weak. I confess to you that I have not the energy TO WISH
TO LIVE. I don't care about it; moving from where I am comfortable,
to seek new fatigues, working like a dog to renew a dog's life, it
is a little stupid, I think, when it would be so sweet to pass away
like that, still loving, still loved, at strife with no one, not
discontent with oneself and dreaming of the wonders of other worlds-
-this assumes that the imagination is still fresh. But I don't know
why I talk to you of things considered sad, I have too much the
habit of looking at them pleasantly. I forget that they appear
afflicting to those who seem in the fulness of life. Don't let's
talk about them any longer and let spring do the work, spring which
perhaps will breathe into me the desire to take up my work again. I
shall be as docile to the interior voice that tells me to walk as to
that telling me to sit down.

It is not I who promised you a novel on the Holy Virgin. At least I
don't think so. I can not find my article on faience. Do look and
see if it was printed at the end of one of my volumes to complete
the last sheet. It was entitled Giovanni Freppa ou les Maioliques.

Oh! what luck! While writing to you it has come back to me that
there is a corner where I have not looked. I hasten there, I find
it! I find something better than my article, and I send you three
works which will make you as learned as I am. That of Passeri is
charming.

Barbes has intelligence, certainly! but he is a sugar loaf. Brain on
a lofty scale, head of an Indian, with gentle instincts, almost
impossible to find; all for metaphysical thought which becomes an
instinct and a passion that dominates everything. Add to that a
character that one can only compare to Garibaldi. A creature of
incredible sanctity and perfection. Immense worth without immediate
application in France. The setting of another age or another country
is what this hero needs. And now good-night,--O God, what a CALF I
am! I leave you the title of COW, which you give yourself in your
days of weariness. Never mind, tell me when you are to be in Paris.
It is probable that I shall have to go there for a few days for one
thing or another. We must embrace each other and then you shall come
to Nohant this summer. It is agreed, it must be!

My affectionate regards to your mother and to your lovely niece.

Please acknowledge the receipt of the three pamphlets; they would be
a loss.



XLIX. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear master,

You really ought to go to see the sun somewhere; it is foolish to be
always suffering; do travel; rest; resignation is the worst of the
virtues.

I have need of it in order to endure all the stupidities that I
hear! You can not imagine to what a degree they have reached. France
which has been sometimes taken with St. Vitus dance (as under
Charles VI), seems to me now to have a paralysis of the brain. They
are mad with fear. Fear of the Prussians, fear of the strikes, fear
of the Exposition which does not go well, fear of everything. We
have to go back to 1849 to find such a degree of imbecility.

There was at the last Magny such inane conversation that I swore to
myself never to put foot inside the place again. The only subjects
under discussion all the time were Bismarck and the Luxembourg. I
was stuffed with it! For the rest I don't find it easy to live. Far
from becoming blunted my sensibilities are sharper; a lot of
insignificant things make me suffer. Pardon this weakness, you who
are so strong and tolerant.

The novel does not go at all well. I am deep in reading the
newspapers of '48. I have had to make several (and have not yet
finished) journeys to Sevres, to Creil, etc.

Father Sainte-Beuve is preparing a discourse on free thought which
he will read at the Senate a propos of the press law. He has been
very shrewd, you know.

You tell your son Maurice that I love him very much, first because
he is your son and secundo because he is he. I find him good,
clever, cultivated, not a poseur, in short charming, and "with
talent."



L. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 4 March, 1867

Dear good friend, the friend of my heart, the old troubadour is as
well as ten thousand men--who are well, and he is gay as a finch,
because the sun shines again and copy is progressing.

He will probably go to Paris soon for the play by his son Dumas, let
us try to be there together.

Maurice is very proud to be declared COCK by an eagle. At this
moment he is having a spree with veal and wine in honor of his
firemen.

The AMERICAN [Footnote: Henry Harrisse.] in question is charming. He
has, literally speaking, a passion for you, and he writes me that
after seeing you he loves you more, that does not surprise me.

Poor Bouilhet! Give him this little note enclosed here. I share his
sorrow, I knew her.

Are you amused in Paris? Are you as sedentary there as at Croisset?

In that case I shall hardly see you unless I go to see you.

Tell me the hours when you do not receive the fair sex, and when
sexagenarian troubadours do not incommode you.

Cadio is entirely redone and rewritten up to the part I read to you,
it is less offensive.

I am not doing Montreveche. I will tell you about that. It is quite
a story. I love you and I embrace you with all my heart.

Your old George Sand

Did you receive my pamphlets on the faience? You have not
acknowledged them. They were sent to Croisset the day after I got
your last letter.



LI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
14 March, 1867

Your old troubadour is again prostrate. Every moment his guitar
threatens to be broken. And then he sleeps forty-eight hours and is
cured--but feeble, and he can not be in Paris on the 16th as he had
intended. Maurice went alone a little while ago, I shall go to join
him in five or six days.

Little Aurore consoles me for this mischance. She twitters like a
bird along with the birds who are twittering already as in full
spring time.

The anemone Sylvia which I brought from the woods into the garden
and which I had a great deal of trouble in acclimating is finally
growing thousands of white and pink stars among the blue periwinkle.
It is warm and damp. One can not break one's guitar in weather like
this. Good-bye, dear good friend.

G. Sand



LII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Friday, 22 March, 1867

Your old troubadour is here, not so badly off. He will go to dine on
Monday at Magny's, we shall agree on a day for both of us to dine
with Maurice. He is at home at five o'clock but not before Monday.

He is running around!

He embraces you.



LIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
1867 (?)

Then Wednesday, if you wish, my dear old fellow. Whom do you want to
have with us? Certainly, the dear Beuve if that is possible, and no
one if you like.

We embrace you.

G. S. Maurice Saturday evening.



LIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 11 April, 1867

Here I am back again in my nest, and almost cured from a bad fever
which attacked me in Paris, the day before my departure.

Really your old troubadour has had ridiculous health for six months.
March and April have been such stupid months for him. It makes no
difference, however, for he is recovering again, and is seeing once
more the trees and the grass grow, it is always the same thing and
that is why it is beautiful and good. Maurice has been touched by
the friendship that you have shown him; you have seduced and
ravished him, and he is not demonstrative.

He and his wife,--who is not at all an ordinary woman,--desire
absolutely that you come to our house this year, I am charged to
tell you so very seriously and persistently if need be  And is that
hateful grip gone? Maurice wanted to go to get news of you; but on
seeing me so prostrated by the fever, he thought of nothing except
packing me up and bringing me here like a parcel. I did nothing
except sleep from Paris to Nohant and I was revived on receiving the
kisses of Aurore who knows now how to give great kisses, laughing
wildly all the while; she finds that very funny.

And the novel? Does it go on its way the same in Paris as in
Croisset? It seems to me that everywhere you lead the same
hermitlike existence. When you have the time to think of friends,
remember your old comrade and send him two lines to tell him that
you are well and that you don't forget him.



LV. TO GEORGE SAND

I am worried at not having news from you, dear master. What has
become of you? When shall I see you?

My trip to Nohant has fallen through. The reason is this: my mother
had a little stroke a week ago. There is nothing left of it, but it
might come on again. She is anxious for me, and I am going to hurry
back to Croisset. If she is doing well towards the month of August,
and I am not worried, it is not necessary to tell you that I shall
rush headlong towards your home.

As regards news, Sainte-Beuve seems to me very ill, and Bouilhet has
just been appointed librarian at Rouen.

Since the rumours of war have quieted down, people seem to me a
little less foolish. My nausea caused by the public cowardice is
decreasing.

I went twice to the Exposition; it is amazing. There are splendid
and extraordinary things there. But man is made to swallow the
infinite. One would have to know all sciences and all arts in order
to be interested in everything that one sees on the Champ de Mars.
Never mind; someone who had three entire months to himself, and went
every morning to take notes, would save himself in consequence much
reading and many journeys.

One feels oneself there very far from Paris, in a new and ugly
world, an enormous world which is perhaps the world of the future.
The first time that I lunched there, I thought all the time of
America, and I wanted to speak like a negro.



LVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 9 May, 1867

Dear friend of my heart,

I am well, I am at work, I am finishing Cadio. It is warm, I am
alive, I am calm and sad, I hardly know why. In this existence so
even, so tranquil, and so gentle as I have here, I am in an element
that weakens me morally while strengthening me physically; and I
fall into melancholies of honey and roses which are none the less
melancholy. It seems to me that all those I love forget me, and that
it is justice, because I live a selfish life having nothing to do
for any one of them.

I have lived with tremendous attachments which overwhelmed me, which
exceeded my strength and which I often used to curse. And it happens
that having nothing more to carry them on with, I am bored by being
well. If the human race went on very well or very ill, one would
reattach oneself to a general interest, would live with an idea,
wise or foolish. But you see where we are now, you who storm so
fiercely against cowards. That disappears, you say? But only to
recommence! What kind of a society is it that becomes paralyzed in
the midst of its expansions, because tomorrow can bring a storm? The
thought of danger has never produced such demoralizations. Have we
declined to such an extent that it is necessary to beg us to eat,
telling us at the same time that nothing will happen to disturb our
digestion? Yes, it is silly, it is shameful. Is it the result of
prosperity, and does civilization involve this sickly and cowardly
selfishness?

My optimism has had a rude jolt of late. I worked up a joy, a
courage at the idea of seeing you here. It was like a cure that I
carefully contrived, but you are worried about your dear, old
mother, and certainly I can not protest.

Well, if, before your departure from Paris, I can finish Cadio, to
which I am bound under pain of having nothing wherewith to pay for
my tobacco and my shoes, I shall go with Maurice to embrace you. If
not, I shall hope for you about the middle of the summer. My
children, quite unhappy by this delay, beg to hope for you also, and
we hope it so much the more because it would be a good sign for the
dear mother.

Maurice has plunged again into Natural History; he wants to perfect
himself in the MICROS; I learn on the rebound. When I shall have
fixed in my head the name and the appearance of two or three
thousand imperceptible varieties, I shall be well advanced, don't
you think so? Well, these studies are veritable OCTOPUSES, which
entwine about you and which open to you I don't know what infinity.
You ask if it is the destiny of man to DRINK THE INFINITE; my
heavens, yes, don't doubt it, it is his destiny, since it is his
dream and his passion.

Inventing is absorbing also; but what fatigue afterwards! How empty
and worn out intellectually one feels, when one has scribbled for
weeks and months about that animal with two legs which has the only
right to be represented in novels! I see Maurice quite refreshed and
rejuvenated when he returns from his beasts and his pebbles, and if
I aspire to come out from my misery, it is to bury myself also in
studies, which in the speech of the Philistines, are not of any use.
Still it is worth more than to say mass and to ring the bell for the
adoration of the Creator.

Is it true what you tell me of G----? Is it possible? I can not
believe it. Is there in the atmosphere which the earth engenders
nowadays, a gas, laughing or otherwise, which suddenly seizes the
brain, and carries it on to commit extravagances, as there was under
the first revolution a maddening fluid which inspired one to commit
cruelties? We have fallen from the Hell of Dante into that of
Scarron.

Of what are you thinking, good head and good heart, in the midst of
this bacchanal? You are wrathful, oh very well, I like that better
than if you were laughing at it; but when you are calmer and when
you reflect?

Must one find some fashion of accepting the honor, the duty, and the
fatigue of living? As for me, I revert to the idea of an everlasting
journey through worlds more amusing, but it would be necessary to go
there quickly and change continually. The life that one fears so
much to lose is always too long for those who understand quickly
what they see. Everything repeats itself and goes over and over
again in it.

I assure you that there is only one pleasure: learning what one does
not know, and one happiness: loving the exceptions. Therefore I love
you and I embrace you tenderly.

Your old troubadour G. Sand

I am anxious about Sainte-Beuve. What a loss that would be! I am
content if Bouilhet is content. Is it really a good position?



LVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Paris, Friday morning

I am returning to my mother next Monday, dear master. I have little
hope of seeing you before then!

But when you are in Paris, what is to prevent you from pushing on to
Croisset where everyone, including myself, adores you? Sainte-Beuve
has finally consented to see a specialist and to be seriously
treated. And he is better anyway. His morale is improving.

Bouilhet's position gives him four thousand francs a year and
lodging. He now need not think of earning his living, which is a
real luxury.

No one talks of the war any more, they don't talk of anything.

The Exposition alone is what "everybody is thinking about," and the
cabmen exasperate the bourgeois.

They were beautiful (the bourgeois) during the strike of the
tailors. One would have said that SOCIETY was going to pieces.

Axiom: Hatred of the bourgeois is the beginning of virtue. But I
include in the word bourgeois, the bourgeois in blouses as well the
bourgeois in coats.

It is we and we alone, that is to say the literary men, who are the
people, or to say it better: the tradition of humanity.

Yes, I am susceptible to disinterested angers and I love you all the
more for loving me for that. Stupidity and injustice make me roar,--
and I HOWL in my corner against a lot of things "that do not concern
me."

How sad it is not to live together, dear master, I admired you
before I knew you. From the day I saw your lovely and kind face, I
loved you. There you are.--And I embrace you warmly.

Your old

Gustave Flaubert

I shall have the package of pamphlets about faience sent to the rue
des Feuillantines. A good handshake to Maurice. A kiss on the four
cheeks of Mademoiselle Aurore.



LVIII. TO GEORGE SAND

I stayed thirty-six hours in Paris at the beginning of this week, in
order to be present at the Tuileries ball. Without any exaggeration,
it was splendid. Paris on the whole turns to the colossal. It is
becoming foolish and unrestrained. Perhaps we are returning to the
ancient Orient. It seems to me that idols will come out of the
earth. We are menaced with a Babylon.

Why not? The INDIVIDUAL has been so denied by democracy that he will
abase himself to a complete effacement, as under the great
theocratic despotisms.

The Tsar of Russia displeased me profoundly; I found him a rustic.
On a parallel with Monsieur Floquet who cries without any danger:
"Long live Poland!" We have chic people who have had themselves
registered at the Elysee. Oh! what a fine epoch!

My novel goes piano. The further I get on the more difficulties
arise. What a heavy cart of sandstone to drag along! And you pity
yourself for a labor that lasts six months!

I have enough more for two years, at least (OF MINE). How the devil
do you find the connection between your ideas? It is that that
delays me. Moreover this book demands tiresome researches. For
instance on Monday; I was at the Jockey Club, at the Cafe Anglais,
and at a lawyer's in turn.  Do you like Victor Hugo's preface to the
Paris-Guide? Not very much, do you? Hugo's philosophy seems to me
always vague.

I was carried away with delight, a week ago, at an encampment of
Gypsies who had established at Rouen. This is the third time that I
have seen them and always with a new pleasure.  The great thing is
that they excite the hatred of the bourgeois, although they are as
inoffensive as sheep.

I appeared very badly before the crowd because I gave them a few
sous, and I heard some fine words a la Prudhomme. That hatred
springs from something very profound and complex.  One finds it
among all orderly people.

It is the hatred that one feels for the bedouin, for the heretic,
the philosopher, the solitary, the poet; and there is a fear in that
hate. I, who am always for the minority, am exasperated by it. It is
true that many things exasperate me. On the day that I am no longer
outraged, I shall fall flat as the marionette from which one
withdraws the support of the stick.

Thus, THE STAKE that has supported me this winter, is the
indignation that I had against our great national historian, M.
Thiers, who had reached the condition of a demi-god, and the
pamphlet Trochu, and the everlasting Changarnier coming back over
the water. God be thanked that the Exposition has delivered us
momentarily from these GREAT MEN.



LIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 30 May, 1867

Here you are at home, old friend of my heart, and I and Maurice must
go to embrace you. If you are still buried in work, we shall only
come and go. It is so near to Paris, that you must not hesitate to
tell us. I have finished Cadio, hurray! I have only to POLISH it a
little. It is like an illness, carrying this great affair for so
long in one's HEAD. I have been so interrupted by real illnesses
that I have had great trouble in setting to work again at it. But I
am wonderfully well since the fine weather and I am going to take a
bath of botany.

Maurice will take one of entomology. He walks three leagues with a
friend of like energy in order to hunt in a great plain for an
animal which has to be looked at with a magnifying glass. That is
happiness! That is being really infatuated. My gloom has disappeared
in making Cadio; at present I am only fifteen years old, and
everything to me appears for the best in the best possible of
worlds. That will last as long as it can. These are the intervals of
innocence in which forgetfulness of evil compensates for the
inexperience of the golden age.

How is your dear mother? She is fortunate to have you again near
her! And the novel? Good heavens! it must get on! Are you walking a
little? Are you more reasonable?

The other day, some people not at all stupid were here who spoke
highly of Madame Bovary, but with less zest of Salammbo. Lina got
into a white heat, not being willing that those wretches should make
the slightest objection to it; Maurice had to calm her, and moreover
he criticised the work very well, as an artist and as a scholar; so
well that the recalcitrants laid down their arms. I should like to
have written what he said. He speaks little and often badly; but
that time he succeeded extraordinarily well.

I shall then not say adieu, but au revoir, as soon as possible. I
love you much, much, my dear old fellow, you know it. My ideal would
be to live a long life with a good and great heart like yours. But
then, one would want never to die, and when one is really OLD, like
me, one must hold oneself ready for anything.

I embrace you tenderly, so does Maurice. Aurore is the sweetest and
the most ridiculous person. Her father makes her drink while he
says: Dominus vobiscum! then she drinks and answers: Amen! How she
is getting on! What a marvel is the development of a little child!
No one has ever written about that. Followed day by day, it would be
precious in every respect. It is one of those things that we all see
without noticing.

Adieu again; think of your old troubadour who thinks unceasingly of
you.

G. Sand



LX. TO Gustave Flaubert
Nohant, 14 June, 1867

Dear friend of my heart, I leave with my son and his wife the 20th
of the month to stay two weeks in Paris, perhaps more if the revival
of Villemer delays me longer. Therefore your dear good mother, whom
I do not want to miss, has all the time she needs to go to see her
daughters. I shall wait in Paris until you tell me if she has
returned, or rather, if I make you a real visit, you shall tell me
the time that suits you best.

My intention, for the moment, was quite simply to go to pass an hour
with you, and Lina was tempted to accompany me; I should have shown
her Rouen, and then we should have embraced you in time to return in
the evening to Paris; for the dear little one has always her ear and
her heart listening when she is away from Aurore, and her holidays
are marked by a continual uneasiness which I quite understand.
Aurore is a treasure of gentleness which absorbs us all. If it can
be arranged, we shall then go on the run to grasp your hands. If it
can not, I shall go alone later when your heart says so, and, if you
are going south, I shall put it off until everything can be arranged
without disturbing whatever may be the plans of your mother or
yourself. I am very free. So, don't disturb yourself, and arrange
your summer without bothering about me.

I have thirty-six plans also, but I don't incline to any one; what
amuses me is what seizes me and takes me off suddenly. It is with a
journey as with a novel: those who travel are those who command.
Only when one is in Paris, Rouen is not a journey, and I shall
always be ready when I am there, to respond to your call. I am a
little remorseful to take whole days from your work, I who am never
bored with loafing, and whom you could leave for whole hours under a
tree, or before two lighted logs, with the assurance that I should
find there something interesting. I know so well how to live OUTSIDE
OF MYSELF! It hasn't always been like that. I also was young and
subject to indignations. It is over!

Since I have dipped into real nature, I have found there an order, a
system, a calmness of cycles which is lacking in mankind, but which
man can, up to a certain point, assimilate when he is not too
directly at odds with the difficulties of his own life. When these
difficulties return he must endeavor to avoid them; but if he has
drunk the cup of the eternally true, he does not get too excited for
or against the ephemeral and relative truth.

But why do I say this to you? Because it comes to my pen-point; for
in considering it carefully, your state of overexcitement is
probably truer, or at least more fertile and more human than my
SENILE tranquillity. I would not like to make you as I am, even if
by a magical operation I could. I should not be interested in myself
if I had the honor to meet myself. I should say that one troubadour
is enough to manage and I should send the other to Chaillot.

A propos of gypsies, do you know that there are gypsies of the sea?
I discovered in the outskirts of Tamaris, among the furthest rocks,
great boats well sheltered, with women and children, a coast
settlement, very restricted, very tanned; fishing for food without
trading; speaking a language that the people of the country do not
understand; living only in these great boats stranded on the sand,
when the storms troubled them in their rocky coves; intermarrying,
inoffensive and sombre, timid or savage; not answering when any one
speaks to them. I don't even know what to call them. The name that I
have been told has escaped me but I could get some one to tell me
again. Naturally the country people hate them and that they have no
religion; if that is so they ought to be superior to us. I ventured
all alone among them. "Good day, sirs." Response, a slight bend of
the head. I looked at their encampment, no one moved. It seemed as
if they did not see me. I asked them if my curiosity annoyed them. A
shrug of the shoulders as if to say, "What do we care?" I spoke to a
young man who was mending the meshes in a net very cleverly; I
showed him a piece of five francs in gold. He looked the other way.
I showed him one in silver. He deigned to look at it. "Do you want
it?" He bent his head on his work. I put it near him, he did not
move. I went away, he followed me with his eyes. When he thought
that I could not see him any longer, he took the piece and went to
talk with a group. I don't know what happened. I fancy that they put
it in the common exchequer. I began botanizing at some distance
within  sight to see if they would come to ask me something or to
thank me. No one moved. I returned as if by chance towards them; the
same silence, the same indifference. An hour later, was at the top
of the cliff, and I asked the coast-guard who those people were who
spoke neither French, nor Italian, nor patois. He told me their
name, which I have not remembered.

He thought that they were Moors, left on the coast since the time of
the great invasions from Provence, and perhaps he is not mistaken.
He told me that he had seen me among them from his watch tower, and
that I was wrong, for they were a people capable of anything; but
when I asked him what harm they did he confessed to me that they had
done none. They lived by their fishing and above all on the things
cast up by the sea which they knew how to gather up before the most
alert. They were an object of perfect scorn. Why? Always the same
story. He who does not do as all the world does can only do evil.

If you go into the country, you might perhaps meet them at the end
of the Brusq. But they are birds of passage, and there are years
when they do not appear at all. I have not even seen the Paris
Guide. They owe me a copy, however; for I gave something to it
without receiving payment. It is because of that no doubt that they
have forgotten me.

To conclude, I shall be in Paris from the 20th of June to the 5th of
July. Send me a word always to 97 rue des Feuillantines. I shall
stay perhaps longer, but I don't know. I embrace you tenderly, my
splendid old fellow. Walk a little, I beg of you. I don't fear
anything for the novel; but I fear for the nervous system taking too
much the place of the muscular system. I am very well, except for
thunder bolts, when I fall on my bed for forty-eight hours and don't
want any one to speak to me. But it is rare and if I do not relent
so that they can nurse me, I get up perfectly cured.

Maurice's love. Entomology has taken possession of him this year; he
discovers marvels. Embrace your mother for me, and take good care of
her. I love you with all my heart.

G. Sand



LXI. To GUSTAVE FLATUBERT
Nohant, 24 July, 1867

Dear good friend, I spent three weeks in Paris with my children,
hoping to see you arriving or to receive a line from you which would
tell me to come and embrace you. But you were HEAD OVER HEELS and I
respect these crises of work; I know them! Here am I back again in
old Nohant, and Maurice at Nerac terminating by a compromise the
law-suit which keeps him from his inheritance. His agreeable father
stole about three hundred thousand francs from his children in order
to please his cook; happily, although Monsieur used to lead this
edifying life, I used to work and did not cut into my capital. I
have nothing, but I shall leave the daily bread assured.

They write me that Villemer goes well. Little Aurore is as pretty as
anything and does a thousand gracious tricks. My daughter Lina is
always my real daughter The OTHER is well and is beautiful, that is
all that I ask of her.

I am working again; but I am not strong. I am paying for my energy
and activity in Paris. That does not make any difference, I am not
angry against life, I love you with all my heart. I see, when I am
gloomy, your kind face, and I feel the radiant power of your
goodness. You are a charm in the Indian summer of my sweet and pure
friendships, without egoisms, and without deceptions in consequence.

Think of me sometimes, work well and call me when you are ready to
loaf. If you are not ready, never mind. If your heart told you to
come here, there would be feasting and joy in the family. I saw
Sainte-Beuve, I am content and proud of him.

Good night, friend of my heart. I embrace you as well as your
mother.

G. Sand



LXII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Paris
Nohant, 6 August, 1867

When I see how hard my old friend has to work in order to write a
novel, it discourages my facility, and I tell myself that I write
BOTCHED literature. I have finished Cadio; it has been in Buloz'
hands a long time. I am writing another thing,[Footnote:
Mademoiselle Merquem.] but I don't see it yet very clearly; what can
one do without sun and without heat? I ought to be in Paris now, to
see the Exposition again at my leisure, and to take your mother to
walk with you; but I really must work, since I have only that  to
live on. And then the children; that Aurore is a wonder. You really
must see her, perhaps I shall not see her long, If I don't think I
am destined to grow very old; I must lose no time in loving!

Yes, you are right, it is that that sustains me. This hypocritical
fit has a rough disillusionment in store for it, and one will lose
nothing by waiting. On the contrary, one will gain. You will see
that, you who are old though still quite young. You are my son's
age. You will laugh together when you see this heap of rubbish
collapse.

You must not be a Norman, you must come and see us for several days,
you will make us happy; and it will restore the blood in my veins
and the joy in my heart.

Love your old troubadour always and talk to him of Paris; a few
words when you have the time.

Outline a scene for Nohant with four or five characters, we shall
enjoy it. We embrace you and summon you.

G. Sand



LXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 18 August, 1867

Where are you, my dear old fellow? If by chance you should be in
Paris, during the first few days of September, let us try to see
each other. I shall stay there three days and I shall return here.
But I do not hope to meet you there. You ought to be in some lovely
country, far from Paris and from its dust. I do not know even if my
letter will reach you. Never mind, if you can give news of yourself,
do so. I am in despair. I have lost suddenly, without even knowing
that he was ill, my poor dear, old friend, Rollinat, an angel of
goodness, of courage, of devotion. It is a heavy blow for me. If you
were here you would give me courage; but my poor children are as
overwhelmed as I am. We adored him, all the countryside adored him.

Keep well, and think sometimes of your absent friends. We embrace
you affectionately. The little one is very well, she is charming.



LXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Paris
Nohant, August, 1867

I bless you, my dear old fellow, for the kind thought that you had
of coming; but you were right not to travel while you were ill. Ah!
my God, I dream of nothing but illness and unhappiness: take care of
yourself, my old comrade. I shall go to see you if I can pull myself
together; for, since this new dagger-thrust, I am feeble and crushed
and I have a sort of fever. I shall write you a line from Paris. If
you are prevented, you must answer me by telegram. You know that
with me there is no need of explanation: I know every hindrance in
life and I never blame the hearts that I know.--I wish that, right
away, if you have a moment to write, you would tell me where I
should go for three days to see the coast of Normandy without
striking the neighborhood where "THE WORLD" goes. In order to go on
with my novel, I must see a countryside near the Channel, that all
the world has not talked about, and where there are real natives at
home, peasants, fisherfolk, a real village in a corner of the rocks.
If you are in the mood we will go there together. If not, don't
bother about me. I go everywhere and I am not disturbed by anything.
You told me that the population of the coasts was the best in the
country, and that there were real dyed-in-the-wool simple-hearted
men there. It would be good to see their faces, their clothes, their
houses, and their horizons. That is enough for what I want to do, I
need only accessories; I hardly want to describe; SEEING it is
enough in order not to make a false stroke. How is your mother? Have
you been able to take her to walk and to distract her a little?
Embrace her for me as I embrace you.

G. Sand

Maurice embraces you; I shall go to Paris without him: he is drawn
on the jury for the 2 September till...no one knows. It is a
tiresome task. Aurore is very cunning with her arms, she offers them
to you to kiss; her hands are marvels and they are incredibly clever
for her age.

Au revoir, then, if I can only pull myself out of the state I am now
in. Insomnia is the devil; in the daytime one makes a lot of effort
not to sadden others. At night one falls back on oneself.



LXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 10 September, 1867

Dear old fellow,

I am worried at not having news of you since that illness of which
you spoke. Are you well again? Yes, we shall go to see the rollers
and the beaches next month if you like, if your heart prompts you.
The novel goes on apace; but I shall besprinkle it with local color
afterwards.

While waiting, I am still here, stuck up to my chin in the river
every day, and regaining my strength entirely in this cold and shady
stream which I adore, and where I have passed so many hours of my
life reviving myself after too long sessions in company with my ink-
well. I go definitely to Paris, the 16th; the 17th at one o'clock, I
leave for Rouen and Jumieges, where my friend Madame Lebarbier de
Tinan awaits me at the house of M. Lepel-Cointet, the landowner; I
shall stay there the 18th so as to return to Paris the 19th. Will it
be inconvenient if I come to see you? I am sick with longing to do
so; but I am so absolutely forced to spend the evening of the 19th
in Paris that I do not know if I shall have the time. You must tell
me. I can get a word from you the 16th in Paris, 97 rue des
Feuillantines. I shall not be alone; I have as a travelling
companion a charming young literary woman, Juliette Lamber. If you
were lovely, lovely, you would walk to Jumieges the 19th. We would
return together so that I could be in Paris at six o'clock in the
evening at the latest. But if you are even a little bit ill still,
or are PLUNGED in ink, pretend that I have said nothing, and prepare
to see us next month. As for the WINTER walk on the Norman coast,
that gives me a cold in my back, I who plan to go to the Gulf of
Juan at that time.

I have been sick over the death of my friend Rollinat. My body is
cured, but my soul! I should have to stay a week with you to refresh
myself in your affectionate strength; for cold and purely
philosophical courage to me, is like cauterizing a wooden leg.

I embrace you and I love you (also your mother). Maurice also, what
French! One is happy to forget it, it is a tiresome thing.

Your troubadour

G. Sand



LXVI. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear master,

What, no news?

But you will answer me since I ask you a service. I read this in my
notes: "National of 1841. Bad treatments inflicted on Barbes, kicks
on his breast, dragged by the beard and hair in order to put him in
an in-pace. Consultation of lawyers signed: E. Arago, Favre,
Berryer, to complain of these abominations."

Find out from him if all that is true; I shall be obliged.



LXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Paris, Tuesday, 1st October, 1867

Dear friend, you shall have your information. I asked Peyrat last
evening, I am writing today to Barbes who will answer directly to
you.

Where do you think I have come from? From Normandy. A charming
opportunity took me there six days ago. I had been enchanted with
Jumieges. This time I saw Etretat, Yport, the prettiest of all the
villages, Fecamp, Saint-Valery, which I knew, and Dieppe, which
dazzled me; the environs, the chateau d'Arques, Limes, what a
country! And I went back and forth twice within two steps of
Croisset and I sent you some big kisses; always ready to return with
you to the seaside or to talk with you at your house when you are
free. If I had been alone, I should have bought an old guitar and
should have sung a ballad under your mother's window. But I could
not take a large family to you.

I am returning to Nohant and I embrace you with all my heart.

G. Sand

I think that the Bois-Dore is going well, but I don't know anything
about it. I have a way of my own of being in Paris, namely, being at
the seaside, which does not keep me informed of what is going on.
But I gathered gentians in the long grass of the immense Roman fort
of Limes where I had quite a STUNNING view of the sea. I walked out
like an old horse, but I am returning quite frisky.



LXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND

At last, at last, I have news of you, dear master, and good news,
which is doubly agreeable.

I am planning to return to my home in the country with Madame Sand,
and my mother hopes that will be the case. What do you say? For,
with all that goes on, we never see each other, confound it!

As for my moving, it is not that I lack the desire of being free to
move about. But I should be lost if I stirred before I finish my
novel. Your friend is a man of wax; everything gets imprinted on
him, is encrusted on him, penetrates him. If I should visit you, I
should think of nothing but you and yours, your house, your country,
the appearance of the people I had met, etc. I require great efforts
to gather myself together; I always tend to scatter myself. That is
why, dear adored  master, I deprive myself of going to sit down to
dream aloud in your house. But, in the summer or autumn of 1869, you
shall see what a fine commercial traveller I am, once let loose to
the open air. I am abject, I warn you.

As to news, there is a quiet once more since the Kerveguen incident
has died its beautiful death. Was it not a farce? and silly?

Sainte-Beuve is preparing a lecture on the press law. He is better,
decidedly. I dined Tuesday with Renan. He was marvellously witty and
eloquent, and artistic! as I have never seen him. Have you read his
new book? His preface causes talk. My poor Theo worries me. I do not
think him strong.



LXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Paris
Nohant, 12 October, 1867

I have sent your letter to Barbes; it is fine and splendid, as you
are. I know that the worthy man will be glad of it. But as for me, I
want to throw myself out of the window; for my children are
unwilling to hear of my leaving so soon. Yes, it is horrid to have
seen your house four times without going to see you. But I am
cautious to the point of fear. To be sure the idea of summoning you
to Rouen for twenty minutes did occur to me. But you are not, as I
am, on tiptoe, all ready to start off. You live in your dressing
gown, the great enemy of liberty and activity. To force you to
dress, to go out, perhaps in the middle of an absorbing chapter, and
only to see someone who does not know how to say anything quickly,
and who, the more he is content, the stupider he is,--I did not dare
to. Here I am obliged to finish something which drags along, and
before the final touch I shall probably go to Normandy. I should
like to go by the Seine to Honfleur. It will be next month, if the
cold does not make me ill, and I shall try this time to carry you
away in passing. If not, I shall see you at least, and then I shall
go to Provence.

Ah! if I could only take you there! And if you could, if you would,
during the second week in October when you are going to be free,
come to see me here! You promised, and my children would be so happy
if you would! But you don't love us enough for that, scoundrel that
you are! You think that you have a lot of better friends: you are
very much mistaken; it is always one's best friends whom one
neglects or ignores.

Come, a little courage; you can leave Paris at a quarter past nine
in the morning, and get to Chateauroux at four, there you would find
my carriage and be here at six for dinner. It is not bad, and once
here, we all laugh together like good-natured bears; no one dresses;
there is no ceremony, and we all love one another very much. Say
yes!

I embrace you. And I too have been bored at not seeing you, FOR A
YEAR.

Your old troubadour



LXX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 27 October, 1867

I have just made a resume in a few pages of my impressions as a
landscape painter, gathered in Normandy: it has not much importance,
but I was able to quote three lines from Salammbo, which seemed to
me to depict the country better than all my phrases, and which had
always struck me as a stroke from a master brush. In turning over
the pages to find these lines, I naturally reread almost all, and I
remain convinced that it is  one of the most beautiful books that
have been made since they began to make books.

I am well, and I am working quickly and much, so as to live on my
INCOME this winter in the South. But what will be the delights of
Cannes and where will be the heart to engage in them? My spirits are
in mourning while thinking that at this hour people arc fighting for
the pope. Ah! ISIDORE! [Footnote: Name applied to Napoleon III.]

I have tried in vain this month to go again to see ma Normandie,
that is to say, my great, dear heart's friend. My  children have
threatened me with death if I leave them so soon.  Just at present
friends are coming. You are the only one who  does not talk of
coming on. Yet, that would be so fine! Next month I shall move
heaven and earth to find you wherever you are, and meanwhile I love
you tremendously. And you. Your work? your mother's health? I am
worried at not having news of you.

G. Sand



LXXI. TO GEORGE SAND
1st November, 1867

Dear master,

I was as much ashamed as touched, last evening, when I received your
"very nice" letter. I am a wretch not to have answered the first
one. How did that happen? For I am  usually prompt.

My work does not go very well. I hope that I shall finish my second
part in February. But in order to have it all finished in two years,
I must not budge from my arm-chair till then. That is why I am not
going to Nohant. A week of recreation means three months of revery
for me. I should do nothing but think of you, of yours in Berry, of
all that I saw. My  unfortunate spirit would navigate in strange
waters. I have so little resistance.

I do not hide the pleasure that your little word about SALAMMBO
gives me. That old book needs to be relieved from a few inversions,
there are too many repetitions of ALORS, MAIS and ET. The labor is
too evident.

As for the one I am doing, I am afraid that the idea is defective,
an irremediable fault; will such weak characters be interesting?
Great effects are reached only through simple means, through
positive passions. But I don't see simplicity anywhere in the modern
world.

A sad world! How deplorable and how lamentably grotesque are affairs
in Italy! All these orders, counter-orders of  counter-orders of the
counter-orders! The earth is a very inferior planet, decidedly.

You did not tell me if you were satisfied with the revivals at the
Odeon. When shall you go south? And where shall you go in the south?

A week from today, that is to say, from the 7th to the 10th of
November, I shall be in Paris, because I have to go  sauntering in
Auteuil in order to discover certain little nooks. What would be
nice would be for us to come back to Croisset together. You know
very well that I am very angry at you for your two last trips in
Normandy.

Then, I shall see you soon? No joking? I embrace you as I love you,
dear master, that is to say, very tenderly.

Here is a bit that I send to your dear son, a lover of this sort of
fluff:

"One evening, expected by Hortense,
Having his eyes fixed on the clock,
And feeling his heart beat with eager throbs,
Young Alfred dried up with impatience."
(Memoires de l'Academie de Saint-Quentin.)



LXXII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 5 December, 1867

Your old troubadour is no good, I admit it. He has been working like
an ox to have the money to go away with this winter to the gulf of
Juan, and at the moment of leaving he would like to stay behind. He
is worried at leaving his children and the little Aurore, but he
suffers with the cold, he fears anemia, and he thinks he is doing
his duty in going to find a land which the snow does not render
impracticable, and a sky under which one can breathe without having
dagger-thrusts in one's lungs.

So you see.

He has thought of you, probably much more than you think of him; for
he has stupid and easy work, and his thoughts run elsewhere very far
from him, and from his task, when his hand is weary of writing. As
for you, you work for truth, and you become absorbed, and you have
not heard my spirit, which more than once has TAPPED at your study
door to say to you: "It is I." Or else you have said: "It is a
spirit tapping let him go to the devil!"

Aren't you coming to Paris? I am going there between the 15th and
the 20th. I shall stay there only a few days, and then flee to
Cannes. Will you be there? God grant it! On the whole I am pretty
well; I am furious with you for not wanting to come to Nohant; I
won't reproach you for I don't know how. I have scribbled a lot; my
children are always good and kind to me in every sense of the word.
Aurore is a love.

We have RAVED politically; now we try not to think of it any more
and to have patience. We often speak of you and we love you. Your
old troubadour especially who embraces you with all his heart, and
begs to be remembered to your good mother.

G. Sand



LXXIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday night

Dear master, dear friend of the good God, "let us talk a little of
Dozenval," let us roar at M. Thiers! Can a more triumphant imbecile,
a more abject dabster, a more stercoraceous bourgeois be found! No,
nothing can give the idea of the puking with which this old
diplomatic idiot inspires me in piling up his stupidity on the dung-
hill of bourgeoisie! Is it possible to treat philosophy, religion,
peoples, liberty, the past and future, history, and natural history,
everything and more yet, with an incoherence more inept and more
childish! He seems to me as everlasting as mediocrity! He overwhelms
me!

But the fine thing is the brave national guards whom he stuffed in
1848, who are beginning to applaud him again! What infinite madness!
That proves that everything consists of temperament. Prostitutes,--
like France,--always have a weakness for old buffoons.

Furthermore, I shall try in the third part of my novel (when I reach
the reaction that followed the days of June) to insert a panegyric
about him a propos of his book: De la propriete, and I hope that he
will be pleased with me.

What form should one take to express occasionally one's opinion on
the things of this world, without the risk of passing later for an
imbecile? It is a tough problem. It seems to me that the best thing
is simply to depict the things which exasperate one. To dissect is
to take vengeance. Well! it is not he with whom I am angry, nor with
the others but with OURS.

If they had paid more attention to the education of the SUPERIOR
classes, delaying till later the agricultural meetings; in short, if
the head had been put above the stomach, should we have been likely
to be where we are now?

I have just read, this week, Buchez' Preface to his Histoire
parlementaire. Many inanities which burden us today come from that
among other things.

And now, it is not good of you to say that I do not think of "my old
Troubadour"; of whom then, do I think? perhaps of my wretched book?
but that is more difficult and less agreeable.

How long do you stay at Cannes?

After Cannes shan't you return to Paris? I shall be their towards
the end of January.

In order to finish my book in the spring of 1869, I must not give
myself a week of holiday; that is why I do not go to Nohant. It is
always the story of the Amazons. In order to draw the bow better
they crushed their breast. It is a fine method after all.

Adieu, dear master, write to me, won't you?

I embrace you tenderly.



LXXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 31 December, 1867

I don't agree with you at all that it is necessary to destroy the
breast to draw a bow. I have quite a contrary belief which I follow,
and I think that it is good for many others, probably for the
majority. I have just developed my idea on that subject in a novel
which has been sent to the Revue and will appear after About's. I
think that the artist ought to live according to his nature as much
as possible. To him who loves struggle, warfare; to him who loves
women, love; to an old fellow like me who loves nature, travel and
flowers, rocks, fine landscapes, children also, the family, all that
stirs the emotions, that combats moral anemia.

I think that art always needs a palette overflowing with soft or
striking colors according to the subject of the picture; the artist
is an instrument on which everything ought to play before he plays
on others; but all that is perhaps not applicable to a mind like
yours which has acquired much and now has only to digest. I shall
insist on one point only, that the physical being is necessary to
the moral being and that I fear for you some day a deterioration of
health which will force you to suspend your work and let it grow
cold.

Well, you are coming to Paris the beginning of January and we shall
see each other; for I shall not go until after the New Year. My
children have made me promise to spend that day with them, and I
could not resist, in spite of the great necessity of moving. They
are so sweet! Maurice has an inexhaustible gaiety and invention. He
has made for his marionette theatre, marvelous scenery, properties,
and machinery and the plays which they give in that ravishing box
are incredibly fantastic.

The last one was called 1870. One sees in it, Isidore with Antonelli
commanding the brigands of Calabria, trying to regain his throne and
to re-establish the papacy. Everything is in the future; at the end
the widow Euphemia marries the Grand Turk, the only remaining
sovereign. It is true that he is a former DEMOCRAT and is recognized
as none other than the great tumbler Coquenbois when unmasked. These
plays last till two o'clock in the morning and we are crazy on
coming out of them. We sup till five o'clock. There is a performance
twice a week, and the rest of the time they make the properties, and
the play continues with the same characters, going through the most
incredible adventures.

The public is composed of eight or ten young people, my three great
nephews, and sons of my old friends. They get excited to the point
of yelling. Aurore is not admitted; the plays are not suited to her
age. As for me, I am so amused that I become exhausted. I am sure
that you would be madly amused by it also; for there is a splendid
fire and abandon in these improvisations; and the characters done by
Maurice have the appearance of living beings, of a burlesque life
that is real and impossible at the same time; it seems like a dream.
That is how I have been living for the ten days that I have not been
working.

Maurice gives me this recreation in my intervals of repose that
coincide with his. He brings to it as much ardor and passion as to
his science. He has a truly charming nature and one never gets bored
with him. His wife is also charming, quite large just now, always
moving, busying herself with everything, lying down on the sofa
twenty times a day, getting up to run after her child, her cook, her
husband, who demands a lot of things for his theatre, coming back to
lie down again; crying out that she feels ill and bursting into
shrieks of laughter at a fly that circles about; sewing layettes,
reading the papers with fervor, reading novels which make her weep;
weeping also at the marionettes when there is a little sentiment,
for there is some of that too. In short a personality and a type:
she sings ravishingly, she gets angry, she gets tender, she makes
succulent dainties TO SURPRISE US WITH, and every day of our
vacation there is a little fete which she organizes.

Little Aurore promises to be very sweet and calm, understanding in a
marvelous manner what is said to her and YIELDING TO REASON at two
years of age. It is very extraordinary and I have never seen it
before. It would be disquieting if one did not feel a great serenity
in that little brain.

But how I am gossiping with you! Does all this amuse you? I should
like this chatty letter to substitute for one of those suppers of
ours which I too regret, and which would be so good here with you,
if you were not a stick-in-the-mud, who won't let yourself be
dragged away to LIFE FOR LIFE'S SAKE. Ah! when one is on a vacation,
how work, logic, reason seem strange CONTRASTS! One asks whether one
can ever return to that ball and chain.

I tenderly embrace you, my dear old fellow, and Maurice thinks your
letter so fine that he is going to put the phrases and words at once
in the mouth of his first philosopher. He bids me embrace you for
him.

Madame Juliette Lambert [Footnote: Afterwards, Madame Edmond Adam.]
is really charming; you would like her a great deal, and then you
have it 18 degrees above zero down there, and here we are in the
snow. It is severe; moreover, I rarely go out, and my dog himself
doesn't want to go out. He is not the least amazing member of
society. When he is called Badinguet, he lies on the ground ashamed
and despairing,  and sulks all the evening.



LXXV. TO GEORGE SAND
1st January, 1868

It is unkind to sadden me with the recital of the amusements  at
Nohant, since I cannot share them. I need so much time to do so
little that I have not a minute to lose (or gain), if I want to
finish my dull old book by the summer of 1869.

I did not say it was necessary to suppress the heart, but to
restrain it, alas! As for the regime that I follow which is contrary
to the laws of hygiene, I did not begin yesterday. I am accustomed
to it. I have, nevertheless, a fairly seasoned sense of fatigue, and
it is time that my second part was finished, after which I shall go
to Paris. That will be about the end of the month. You don't tell me
when you return from Cannes.

My rage against M. Thiers is not yet calmed, on the contrary!  It
idealizes itself and increases.



LXXVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 12 January, 1868

No, it is not silly to embrace each other on New Year's day: on the
contrary, it is good and it is nice. I thank you for having thought
of it and I kiss you on your beautiful big eyes. Maurice embraces
you also. I am housed here by the snow and the cold, and my trip is
postponed. We amuse ourselves madly at home so as to forget that we
are prisoners, and I am prolonging  my holidays in a ridiculous
fashion. Not an iota of work from morning till night. What luck if
you could say as much!--But what a fine winter, don't you think so?
Isn't it lovely, the moonlight on the trees covered with snow? Do
you look at that at night while you are working?--If you are going
to Paris the end of the month, I shall still have a chance to meet
you.

From far, or from near, dear old fellow, I think of you and I love
you from the depth of my old heart which does not know the flight of
years.

G. Sand

My love to your mother always. I imagine that she is in Rouen during
this severe cold.



LXXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 10 May, 1868

Yes, friend of my heart, am I not in the midst of terrible things;
that poor little Madame Lambert [Footnote: Madame Eugene Lambert,
the wife of the artist] is severely threatened.

I saw M. Depaul today. One must be prepared for anything!--If the
crisis is passed or delayed, for there is question of bringing on
the event, I shall be happy to spend two days with my old
troubadour, whom I love tenderly.

G. Sand.



LXXVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 11 May, 1868

If you were to be at home Wednesday evening, I should go to chat an
hour alone with you after dinner in your quarters. I despair
somewhat of going to Croisset; it is tomorrow that that they decide
the fate of my poor friend.

A word of response, and above all do not change any plan. Whether I
see you or not, I know that two old troubadours love each other
devotedly!

G. Sand Monday evening.



LXXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 17 May, 1868

I have a little respite, since they are not going to bring on the
confinement. I hope to go to spend two days at that dear Croisset.
But then don't go on Thursday, I am giving a dinner for the prince
[Footnote: Prince Jerome Napoleon.] at Magny's and I told him that I
would detain you by force. Say yes, at once. I embrace you and I
love you.

G. Sand



LXXX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT

I shall not go with you to Croisset, for you must sleep, and we talk
too much. But on Sunday or Monday if you still wish it; only I
forbid you  to inconvenience yourself. I know Rouen, I know that
there are carriages at the railway station and that one goes
straight to your house without any trouble.

I shall probably go in the evening.

Embrace your dear mamma for me, I shall be happy to her again.

G. Sand

If those days do not suit you, a word, and I shall communicate with
you again. Have the kindness to put the address on the ENCLOSED
letter and to put it in the mail.



LXXXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 21 Thursday--May, 1868

I see that the day trains are very slow, I shall make a great effort
and shall leave at eight o'clock Sunday, so as to lunch with you; if
it is too late don't wait for me, I lunch on two eggs made into an
omelet or shirred, and a cup of coffee. Or dine on a little chicken
or some veal and vegetables.

In giving up trying to eat REAL MEAT, I have found again a strong
stomach. I drink cider with enthusiasm, no more champagne! At
Nohant, I live on sour wine and galette, and since I am not trying
any more to THOROUGHLY NOURISH myself, no more anemia; believe then
in the logic of physicians!

In short you must not bother any more about me than about the cat
and not even so much. Tell your little mother, just that. Then I
shall see you at last, all I want to for two days. Do you know that
you are INACCESSIBLE in Paris? Poor old fellow,  did you finally
sleep like a dormouse in your cabin? I would like to give you a
little of my sleep that nothing, not even a cannon, can disturb.

But I have had bad dreams for two weeks about my poor Esther, and
now at last, here are Depaul, Tarnier, Gueniaux and Nelaton who told
us yesterday that she will deliver easily and very well, and that
the child has every reason to be superb. I breathe again, I am born
anew, and I am going to embrace you so hard that you will be
scandalised. I shall see you on Sunday then, and don't inconvenience
yourself.

G. Sand



LXXXII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT Paris, 26 May, 1868

Arrived while dozing. Dined with your delightful and charming
friend Du Camp. We talked of you, only of you and your mother, and
we said a hundred times that we loved you. I am going to sleep so as
to be ready to move tomorrow morning.

I am charmingly located on the Luxembourg garden.

I embrace you, mother and son, with all my heart which is entirely
yours.

G. Sand Tuesday evening, rue Gay-Lussac, 5.



LXXXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT Paris, 28 May, 1868

My little friend gave birth this morning after two hours of labor,
to a boy who seemed dead but whom they handled so well that he is
very much alive and very lovely this evening. The mother is very
well, what luck!

But what a sight! It was something to see. I am very tired, but very
content and tell you so because you love me.

G. Sand

Thursday evening. I leave Tuesday for Nohant.



LXXXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 21 June, 1868

Here I am again, BOTHERING you for M. Du Camp's address which you
never gave me, although you forwarded a letter for me to him, and
from WHOM I never thought of asking for it when I dined with him in
Paris. I have just read his Forces Perdues; I promised to tell him
my opinion and I am keeping my word. Write the address, then give it
to the postman and thank you.

There you are alone at odds with the sun in your charming villa!

Why am I not the...river which cradles you with its sweet MURMURING
and which brings you freshness in your den! I would chat discreetly
with you between two pages of your novel, and I would make that
fantastic grating of the chain [Footnote:  The chain of the tug-boat
going up or coming down the Seine.] which you detest, but whose
oddity does not displease me, keep still. I love everything that
makes up a milieu, the rolling of the carriages and the noise of the
workmen in Paris, the cries of a thousand birds in the country, the
movement of the ships on the waters; I love also absolute, profound
silence, and in short, I love everything that is around me, no
matter where I am; it is AUDITORY IDIOCY, a new variety. It is true
that I choose my milieu and don't go to the Senate nor to other
disagreeable places.

Everything is going on well at our house, my troubadour. The
children are beautiful, we adore them; it is warm, I adore that. It
is always the same old story that I have to tell you and I love you
as the best of friends and comrades. You see that is not new. I have
a good and strong impression of what you read to me; it seemed to me
so beautiful that it must be good. As for me, I am not sticking to
anything. Idling is my dominant passion. That will pass, what does
not pass, is my friendship for you.

G. Sand

Our affectionate regards.



LXXXV. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Sunday, 5 July, 1868

I have sawed wood hard for six weeks. The patriots won't forgive me
for this book, nor the reactionaries either! What do I care! I write
things as I feel them, that is to say, as I think they are. Is it
foolish of me? But it seems to me that our unhappiness comes
exclusively from people of our class. I find an enormous amount of
Christianity in Socialism.  There are two notes which are now on my
table.

"This system (his) is not a system of disorder, for it has its
source in the Gospels, and from this divine source, hatred, warfare,
the clashing of every interest, CAN NOT PROCEED! for the doctrine
formulated from the Gospel, is a doctrine of peace, union and love."
(L. Blanc).

"I shall even dare to advance the statement that together with the
respect for the Sabbath, the last spark of poetic fire has been
extinguished in the soul of our rhymesters. It has been said that
without religion, there is no poetry!" (Proudhon).

A propos of that, I beg of you, dear master, to read at the end of
his book on the observance of the Sabbath, a love-story entitled, I
think, Marie et Maxime. One must know that to have an idea of the
style of les Penseurs. It should be placed on a level with Le Voyage
en Bretagne by the great Veuillot, in Ca et La. That does not
prevent us from having friends who are great admirers of these two
gentlemen.

When I am old, I shall write criticism; that will console me, for I
often choke with suppressed opinions. No one understands better than
I do, the indignation of the great Boileau against bad taste: "The
senseless things which I hear at the Academy hasten my end." There
was a man!

Every time now that I hear the chain of the steam-boats, I think of
you, and the noise irritates me less, when I say to myself that it
pleases you. What moonlight there is tonight on the river!



LXXXVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 31 July, 1868

I am writing to you at Croisset in any case, because I doubt if you
are in Paris during this Toledo-like heat; unless the shade of
Fontainebleau has kept you. What a lovely forest, isn't it? but it
is especially so in winter, without leaves, with its fresh moss,
which has chic. Did you see the sand of Arbonne? There is a little
Sahara there which ought to be lovely now.

We are very happy here. Every day a bath in a stream that is always
cold and shady; in the daytime four hours of work, in the evening,
recreation, and the life of Punch and Judy. A TRAVELLING THEATRICAL
COMPANY came to us; it was part of a company from the Odeon, among
whom were several old friends to whom we gave supper at La Chatre,
two successive nights with all their friends, after the play;--
songs, laughter, with champagne frappe, till three o'clock in the
morning to the great scandal of the bourgeois, who would have
committed any crime to have been there. There was a very comic
Norman, a real Norman, who sang real peasant songs to us, in the
real language. Do you know that they have quite a Gallic wit and
mischief? They contain a mine of master-pieces of genre. That made
me love Normandy still more. You may know that comedian. His name is
Freville. It is he who is charged in the repertory with the parts of
the dull valets, and with being kicked from behind. He is
detestable, impossible, but out of the theatre, he is as charming as
can be. Such is fate!

We have had some delightful guests at our house, and we have had a
joyous time without prejudice to the Lettres d'un Voyageur in the
Revue, or to botanical excursions in some very surprising wild
places. The little girls are the loveliest thing about it all.
Gabrielle is a big lamb, sleeping and laughing all day; Aurore, more
spiritual, with eyes of velvet and fire, talking at thirty months as
others do at five years, and adorable  in everything. They are
keeping her back so that she shall not get ahead too fast.

You worry me when you tell me that your book will blame the patriots
for everything that goes wrong. Is that really so? and then the
victims! it is quite enough to be undone by one's own fault without
having one's own foolishness thrown in one's teeth. Have pity! There
are so many fine spirits among them just the same! Christianity has
been a fad and I confess that in every age it is a lure when one
sees only the tender side of it; it wins the heart. One has to
consider the evil it does in order to get rid of it. But I am not
surprised that a generous  heart like Louis Blanc dreamed of seeing
it purified and restored to his ideal. I also had that illusion; but
as soon as one takes a step in this past, one sees that it can not
be revived,  and I am sure that now Louis Blanc smiles at his dream.
One should think of that also.

One must remind oneself that all those who had intelligence have
progressed tremendously during the last twenty years and that it
would not be generous to reproach them with what they probably
reproach themselves.

As for Proudhon, I never thought him sincere. He is a rhetorician of
GENIUS, as they say. But I don't understand him. He is a specimen of
perpetual antithesis, without solution.  He affects one like one of
the old Sophists whom Socrates made fun of.

I am trusting you for GENEROUS sentiments. One can say a word more
or less without wounding, one can use the lash without  hurting, if
the hand is gentle in its strength. You are so  kind that you cannot
be cruel.

Shall I go to Croisset this autumn? I begin to fear not, and to fear
that Cadio is not being rehearsed. But I shall try to escape from
Paris even if only for one day.

My children send you their regards. Ah! Heavens! there was a fine
quarrel about Salammbo; some one whom you do not know, went so far
as not to like it, Maurice called him BOURGEOIS, and to settle the
affair, little Lina, who is high tempered, declared that her husband
was wrong to use such a word, for he ought to have said IMBECILE.
There you are. I am well as a Turk. I love you and I embrace you.

Your old Troubadour,

G. Sand



LXXXVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Dieppe, Monday

But indeed, dear master, I was in Paris during that tropical heat
(trop picole, as the governor of the chateau of Versailles says),
and I perspired greatly. I went twice to Fontainebleau, and the
second time by your advice, saw the sands of Arboronne. It is so
beautiful that it made me almost dizzy.

I went also to Saint-Gratien. Now I am at Dieppe, and Wednesday I
shall be in Croisset, not to stir from there for a long time, the
novel must progress.

Yesterday I saw Dumas: we talked of you, of course, and as I shall
see him tomorrow we shall talk again of you.

I expressed myself badly if I said that my book "will blame the
patriots for everything that goes wrong." I do not recognize that I
have the right to blame anyone. I do not even think that the
novelist ought to express his own opinion on the things of this
world. He can communicate it, but I do not like him to say it. (That
is a part of my art of poetry.) I limit myself, then, to declaring
things as they appear to me, to expressing what seems to me to be
true. And the devil take the consequences; rich or poor, victors or
vanquished, I admit none of all that. I want neither love, nor hate,
nor pity, nor anger. As for sympathy, that is different; one never
has enough of that. The reactionaries, besides, must be less spared
than the others, for they seem to be more criminal.

Is it not time to make justice a part of art? The impartiality  of
painting would then reach the majesty of the law,--and the precision
of science!

Well, as I have absolute confidence in your great mind, when my
third part is finished, I shall read it to you, and if there is in
my work, something that seems MEAN to you, I will remove it.

But I am convinced beforehand that you will object to nothing.

As for allusions to individuals, there is not a shadow of them.

Prince Napoleon, whom I saw at his sister's Thursday, asked for news
of you and praised Maurice. Princess Matilde told me that she
thought you "charming," which made me like her better than ever.

How will the rehearsals of Cadio prevent you from coming to see your
poor old friend this autumn? It is not impossible. I know Freville.
He is an excellent and very cultivated man.



LXXXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Wednesday evening, 9 September, 1868

Is this the way to behave, dear master? Here it is nearly two months
since you have written to your old troubadour! you in Paris, in
Nohant, or elsewhere? They say that Cadio is now being rehearsed at
the Porte Saint-Martin (so you have fallen out with Chilly?) They
say that Thuillier will make her re-appearance in your play. (But I
thought she was dying). And when are they to play this Cadio? Are
you content? etc., etc.

I live absolutely like an oyster. My novel is the rock to which I
attach myself, and I don't know anything that goes on in the world.

I do not even read, or rather I have not read La Lanterne! Rochefort
bores me, between ourselves. It takes courage to venture to say even
hesitatingly, that possibly he is not the first writer of the
century. O Velches! Velches! as M. de Voltaire would sigh (or roar)!
But a propos of the said Rochefort, have they been somewhat
imbecilic? What poor people!

And Sainte-Beuve? Do you see him? As for me, I am working
furiously. I have just written a description of the forest of
Fontainebleau that made me want to hang myself from one of its
trees. As I was interrupted for three weeks, I am having terrible
trouble in getting back to work. I am like the camels, which can't
be stopped when they are in motion, nor started when they are
resting. It will take me a year to finish the book. After that I
shall abandon the bourgeois definitely. He is too difficult and on
the whole too ugly. It will be high time to do something beautiful
and that I like.

What would please me well for the moment, would be to embrace you.
When will that be? Till then, a thousand affectionate  thoughts.



LXXXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Paris, 10 September, 1868

Just at present, dear friend, there is a truce to my correspondence.
On all sides I am reproached, WRONGLY, for not answering letters. I
wrote you from Nohant about two weeks ago that I was going to Paris,
on business about Cadio:--and now, I am returning to Nohant tomorrow
at dawn to see my Aurore. I have written during the last week, four
acts of the play, and my task is finished until the end of the
rehearsals which will be looked after by my friend and collaborator,
Paul Meurice. All his care does not prevent the working out of the
first part from being a horrible bungle. One needs to see the
putting-on of a play in order to understand that, and if one is not
armed with humor and inner zest for the study of human nature in the
actual individuals whom the fiction is to mask, there is much to
rage about. But I don't rage any more, I laugh; I know too much of
all that to get excited about it, and I shall tell you some fine
stories about it when we meet.

However, as I am an optimist just the same, I look at the good side
of things and people; but the truth is that everything is bad and
everything is good in this world.

Poor Thuillier has not sparkling health; but she hopes to carry the
burden of the work once more. She needs to earn her living, she is
cruelly poor. I told you in my lost letter that Sylvanie [Footnote:
Madame Arnould-Plessy.] had been several days at Nohant. She is more
beautiful than ever and quite well again after a terrible illness.

Would you believe that I have not seen Sainte-Beuve? That I have had
only the time here to sleep a little, and to eat in a hurry? It is
just that. I have not heard anyone whatsoever talked about outside
of the theatre and of the players. I have had mad desires to abandon
everything and to go to surprise you for a couple of hours; but I
have not been a day without being kept at FORCED LABOR.

I shall return here the end of the month, and when they play Cadio,
I shall beg you to spend twenty-four hours here for me. Will you do
it? Yes, you are too good a troubadour to refuse me. I embrace you
with all my heart, and your mother too. I am happy that she is well.

G. Sand



XC. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 18 September, 1868

It will be, I think, the 8th or 10th of October. The management
announces it for the 26th of September. But that seems impossible to
everyone. Nothing is ready; I shall be advised, I shall advise you.
I have come to spend the days of respite that my very conscientious
and very devoted collaborator allows me. I am taking up again a
novel on the THEATRE, the first part of which I had left on my desk,
and I plunge every day in a little icy torrent which tumbles me
about and makes me sleep like a top. How comfortable one is here
with these two little children who laugh and chatter from morning
till night like birds, and how foolish it is to go to compose and to
put on MADE UP THINGS when the reality is so easy and so fine! But
one gets accustomed to regarding all that as a military order, and
goes to the front without asking oneself if it means wounds or
death. Do you think that that bothers me? No, I assure you; but it
does not amuse me either. I go straight ahead, stupid as a  cabbage
and patient as a Berrichon. Nothing is interesting in my life except
OTHER PEOPLE. Seeing you soon in Paris will be more of a pleasure
than my business will be an annoyance to me. Your novel interests me
more than all mine. Impersonality, a sort of idiocy which is
peculiar to me, is making a noticeable progress. If I were not well,
I should think that it was a  malady. If my old heart did not become
each day more loving, I should think it was egotism; in short, I
don't know what it is, and there you are. I have had trouble
recently. I told you of it in the letter which you did not receive.
A person whom you know, whom I love greatly, Celimene, [Footnote:
Madame Arnould-Plessy.] has become a religious  enthusiast, oh!
indeed, an ecstatic, mystic, molinistic religious enthusiast, I
don't know what, imbecile! I have exceeded my limits. I have raged,
I have said the hardest things to her, I have laughed at her.
Nothing made any difference, it was all the same to her. Father
Hyacinthe replaces for her every friendship, every good opinion; can
you understand that? Her very noble mind, a real intelligence, a
worthy character! and there you are! Thuillier is also religious,
but without being changed; she does not like priests, she does not
believe in the devil, she is a heretic without knowing it. Maurice
and Lina are furious against THE OTHER. They don't like her at all.
As for me, it gives me much sorrow not to love her any more.

We love you, we embrace you.

I thank you for coming to see Cadio.

G. Sand



XCI. TO GEORGE SAND

Does that astonish you, dear master? Oh well! it doesn't me! I told
you so but you would not believe me.

I am sorry for you. For it is sad to see the friends one loves
change. This replacement of one soul by another, in a body that
remains the same as it was, is a distressing sight. One feels
oneself betrayed! I have experienced it, and more than once.

But then, what idea have you of women, O, you who are of the third
sex? Are they not, as Proudhon said, "the desolation of the Just"?
Since when could they do without delusions? After love, devotion; it
is in the natural order of things. Dorine has no more men, she takes
the good God. That is all.

The people who have no need of the supernatural, are rare.
Philosophy will always be the lot of the aristocrats. However much
you fatten human cattle, giving them straw as high as their bellies,
and even gilding their stable, they will remain brutes, no matter
what one says. All the advance that one can hope for, is to make the
brute a little less wicked. But as for elevating the ideas of the
mass, giving it a larger and therefore a less human conception of
God, I have my doubts.

I am reading now an honest book (written by one of my friends, a
magistrate), on the Revolution in the Department of Eure. It is full
of extracts from writings of the bourgeois of the time, simple
citizens of the small towns. Indeed I assure you that there is now
very little of that strength! They were literary and fine, full of
good sense, of ideas, and of generosity.

Neo-catholicism on the one hand, and Socialism on the other, have
stultified France. Everything moves between the Immaculate
Conception and the dinner pails of the working people.

I told you that I did not flatter the democrats in my book. But I
assure you that the conservatives are not spared. I am now writing
three pages on the abominations of the national guard in June, 1848,
which will cause me to be looked at favorably  by the bourgeois. I
am rubbing their noses in their own dirt as much as I can. But you
don't give me any details about Cadio. Who are the actors, etc.? I
mistrust your novel about the theatre. You like those people too
much! Have you known any well who love their art? What a quantity of
artists there are who are only bourgeois gone astray!

We shall see each other in three weeks at the latest. I shall be
very glad of it and I embrace you.

And the censorship? I really hope for you that it will make some
blunders. Besides, I should be distressed if it was wanting in its
usual habits.

Have you read this in the paper? "Victor Hugo and Rochefort,  the
greatest writers of the age." If Badinguet now is not avenged, it is
because he is hard to please in the matter of punishments.



XCII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT

The halcyons skim over the water and are common every where. The
name is pretty and sufficiently well known.

I embrace you.

Your troubadour.

Paris, Friday evening, 28 August or 4 September, 1868. In October,
yes, I will try!



XCIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Saturday evening

I received your two notes, dear master. You send me "halcyon" to
replace the word, "dragonfly." Georges Pouchet suggested  gerre of
the lakes (genus, Gerris). Well! neither the one nor the other suits
me, because they do not immediately make a picture for the ignorant
reader.

Must I then describe that little creature? But that would retard the
movement! That would fill up all the landscape I shall put "insects
with large feet" or "long insects." That would be clear and short.

Few books have gripped me more than Cadio, and I share entirely
Maxime's [Footnote: Maxime Du Camp.] admiration.

I should have told you of it sooner if my mother and my niece had
not taken my copy. At last, this evening, they gave it back to me;
it is here on my table, and I am turning the pages as I write you.

In the first place, it seems to me as if IT OUGHT TO HAVE BEEN THE
WAY IT IS! It is plain, it gets you and thrills you. How many people
must be like Saint-Gueltas, like Count de Sauvieres,  like Rebec!
and even like Henri, although the models are rarer. As for the
character of Cadio, which is more of an invention than the others,
what I like best in him is his  ferocious anger. In it is the
special truth of the character. Humanity turned to fury, the
guillotine become mystic, life only a sort of bloody dream, that is
what must take place in such heads. I think you have one
Shakespearean scene: that of the delegate to the Convention with his
two secretaries, is of an incredible strength. It makes one cry out!
There is one also which struck me very much at the first reading:
the scene where Saint-Gueltas and Henri each have the pistols in
their pockets: and many others. What a fine page (I open by chance)
is page 161!

In the play won't you have to give a longer role to the wife of the
good Saint-Gueltas? The play ought not to be very hard to cut. It is
only a question of condensing and shortening it. If it is played,
I'll guarantee a terrific success. But the censorship?

Well, you have written a masterpiece, that's true! and a very
amusing one. My mother thinks it recalls to her stories that she
heard while a child. A propos of Vendee, did you know that her
paternal grandfather was, after M. Lescure, the head of the Vendee
army? The aforesaid head was named M. Fleuriot d'Argentan. I am not
any the prouder for that; besides the thing is doubtful, for my
grandfather, a violent republican, hid his political antecedents.

My mother is going in a few days to Dieppe, to her grandchild's.  I
shall be alone a good part of the summer, and I plan to grub.

"I labor much and shun the world.
It is not at balls that the future is founded."
(Camilla Doucet.)

But my everlasting novel bores me sometimes in an incredible
manner! These tiny details are stupid to bother with! Why annoy
oneself about such a miserable subject?

I would write you at length about Cadio; but it is late and my eyes
are smarting.

So, thank you, very kindly, my dear master.



XCIV. To M. GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Paris, end of September, 1868

Dear friend,

It is for Saturday next, 3rd October. I am at the theatre every
evening from six o'clock till two in the morning. They talk of
putting mattresses behind the scenes for the actors who are not in
front. As for me, as used to wakefulness as you are, I experience no
fatigue; but I should be very much bored if I had not the resource
that one has always, of thinking of other things. I am sufficiently
accustomed to it to be writing another play while they are
rehearsing, and there is something quite  exciting in these great
dark rooms where mysterious characters move, talking in low tones,
in unexpected costumes; nothing is more like a dream, unless one
imagines a conspiracy of patients escaped from Bicetre.

I don't at all know what the performance will be. If one did not
know the prodigies of harmony and of vim which occur at the last
moment, one would judge it all impossible, with thirty-five or forty
speaking actors of whom only five or six speak well. One spends
hours over the exits and entrances of the characters in blue or
white blouses who are to be the soldiers or the peasants, but who,
meanwhile perform incomprehensible manoeuvres. Still the dream. One
has to be a madman to put on these things. And the frenzy of the
actors, pale and worn out, who drag themselves to their place
yawning, and suddenly start like crazy people to declaim their
tirade; continually the assembling of insane people.

The censorship has left us alone as regards the manuscript; tomorrow
these gentlemen will inspect the costumes, which perhaps will
frighten them.

I left my dear world very quiet at Nohant. If Cadio succeeds,  it
will be a little DOT for Aurore; that is all my ambition. If it does
not succeed, I shall have to begin over again, that is all.

I shall see you. Then, in any case, that will be a happy day. Come
to see me the night before, if you arrive the night before, or even
the same day. Come to dine with me the night before or the same day;
I am at home from one o'clock to five. Thank you; I embrace you and
I love you.

G. Sand



XCV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 5 October, 1868

Dear good friend, I recommend again to your good offices, my friend
Despruneaux, so that you will again do what you can to be of use to
him in a very just suit which has already been judged in his favor.

Yours,

G. Sand



XCVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 15 October, 1868

Here I am "ter hum" where, after having hugged my children and my
grandchildren, I slept thirty-six hours at one stretch. You must
believe that I was tired and did not notice it. I am waking from
that animal-hibernation and you are the first person  to whom I want
to write. I did not thank you enough for coming to Paris for my
sake, you who go about so little: and I did not see you enough
either; when I knew that you had supped with Plauchut, [Footnote:
Edmond Plauchut, a writer and a friend of George Sand.] I was angry
at having stayed to take care of my sickly Thuillier, to whom I was
of no use, and who was not particularly pleased about it.  Artists
are spoiled children and the best are great egoists. You say that I
like them too well; I like them as I like the woods and the fields,
everything, every one that I know a little and that I study
continually. I make my life in the midst of all that, and as I like
my life I like all that nourishes it and renews it. They do me a lot
of ill turns which I see, but which I no longer feel. I know that
there are thorns in the hedges, but that does not prevent me from
putting out my hands and finding flowers there. If all are not
beautiful, all are  interesting. The day you took me to the Abbey of
Saint-Georges I found the scrofularia borealis, a very rare plant in
France. I was enchanted; there was much...in the neighborhood where
I gathered it. Such is life!

And if one does not take life like that, one cannot take it in any
way, and then how can one endure it? I find it amusing and
interesting, and since I accept EVERYTHING, I am so much happier and
more enthusiastic when I meet the beautiful and the good. If I did
not have a great knowledge of the species, I should not have quickly
understood you, or known you or loved you. I can have an enormous
indulgence, perhaps banal, for I have had to practice it so much;
but appreciation is quite  another thing, and I do not think that it
is entirely worn out in your old troubadour's mind.

I found my children still very good and very tender, my two little
grandchildren still pretty and sweet. This morning I dreamed, and I
woke up saying this strange sentence: "There is always a youthful
great first part in the drama of life. First part in mine: Aurore."
The fact is that it is impossible not to idolize that little one.
She is so perfect in intelligence and goodness, that she seems to me
like a dream.

You also, without knowing it, YOU ARE A DREAM ... like that.
Plauchut saw you once, and he adored you. That proves that he is not
stupid. When he left me in Paris, he told me to remember him to you.

I left Cadio in doubt between good and average receipts. The cabal
against the new management relaxed after the second day. The press
was half favorable, half hostile. The good weather is against it.
The hateful performance of Roger is also against it. So that we
don't know yet if we shall make money or not. As for me, when money
comes, I say, "So much the better," without excitement, and if it
does not come, I say, "So much the worse," without any chagrin.
Money not being the aim, ought not to be the preoccupation. It is,
moreover, not the real proof of success, since so many vapid or poor
things make money.

Here I am with another play already underway, so as to keep my hand
in. I have a novel also on the stocks, on the STROLLING PLAYERS. I
have studied them a good deal this time without learning anything
new. I already had the plot. It is not complicated and is very
logical.

I embrace you tenderly as well as your little mother. Give me some
sign of life. Does the novel get on?

G. Sand



XCVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Saturday evening

I am remorseful for not having answered at length your last letter,
my dear master. You told me of the "ill turns" that people did you.
Did you think that I did not know it? I  confess to you even
(between ourselves), that I was hurt on account of them more because
of my good taste, than because of my affection for you. I did not
think that several of your friends were warm enough towards you. "My
God! my God! how mean literary men are!" A bit out of the
correspondence of the first Napoleon. What a nice bit, eh? Doesn't
it seem to you that they belittle him too much?

The infinite stupidity of the masses makes me indulgent to
individualities, however odious they may be. I have just gulped down
the first six volumes of Buchez and Roux. The clearest thing I got
out of them is an immense disgust for the French. My Heavens! Have
we always been bunglers in this fair land of ours? Not a liberal
idea which has not been unpopular, not a just thing that has not
caused scandal, not a great man who has not been mobbed or knifed!
"The history of the human mind is the history of human folly!" as
says M. de Voltaire.

And I am convinced more and more of this truth: the doctrine  of
grace has so thoroughly permeated us that the sense of justice has
disappeared. What terrified me so in the history of '48 has quite
naturally its origins in the Revolution, which had not liberated
itself from the middle ages, no matter what they say. I have re-
discovered in Marat entire fragments of Proudhon (sic) and I wager
that they would be found again in the preachers of the League.

What is the measure that the most advanced proposed after Varennes?
Dictatorship and military dictatorship. They close the churches, but
they raise temples, etc.

I assure you that I am becoming stupid with the Revolution. It is a
gulf which draws me in.

However, I work at my novel like a lot of oxen. I hope on New Year's
Day not to have over a hundred pages more to write, that is to say,
still six good months of work. I shall go to Paris as late as
possible. My winter is to pass in complete solitude, good way of
making life run along rapidly.



XCVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 20 November, 1868

You say to me, "When shall we see each other?" About the 15th of
December, we are baptizing here our two little girls as Protestants.
It is Maurice's idea; he was married before the pastor, and does not
want the persecution and influence of the Catholic church about his
children. Our friend Napoleon is the godfather of Aurore, and I am
the godmother. My nephew is the godfather of the other. All that
takes place just among ourselves, in the family. You must come,
Maurice wants you to, and if you say no, you will disappoint him
greatly. You shall bring your novel, and in a free moment, you shall
read it to me; it will do you good to read it to one who listens
well. One gets a perspective and judges one's work better. I know
that. Say yes to your old troubadour, he will be EXCEEDINGLY
GRATEFUL to you for it.

I embrace you six times if you say yes.

G. Sand



XCIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Tuesday

Dear master,

You cannot imagine the sorrow you give me! In spite of the  longing
I have, I answer "no." Yet I am distracted with my desire to say
"yes." It makes me seem like a gentleman who cannot be disturbed,
which is very silly. But I know myself: if I go to your house at
Nohant, I shall have a month of dreaming about my trip. Real
pictures will replace in my brain the fictitious pictures which I
compose with great difficulty. All my house of cards will topple
over.

Three weeks ago because I was foolish enough to accept an invitation
to dinner at a country place nearby, I lost four days (sic). What
would it be on leaving Nohant? You do not understand  that, you
strong Being! I think that you will be a little vexed with your old
troubadour for not coming to the baptism of the two darlings of his
friend Maurice? The dear master must write to me if I am wrong, and
to give me the news!

Here is mine! I work immoderately and am absolutely ENCHANTED by the
prospect of the end which begins to be visible.

So that it may arrive more quickly, I have made the resolution to
live here all winter, probably until the end of March. Even
admitting that everything goes perfectly, I shall not have finished
all before the end of May. I don't know anything that goes on and I
read nothing, except a little of the French Revolution,  after my
meals, to aid digestion. I have lost my former good habit of reading
every day in Latin. Therefore I don't know a word of it any more! I
shall polish it up again when I am freed from my odious bourgeois,
and I am nowhere near it.

My only excitement consists in going to dine on Sundays at Rouen
with my mother. I leave at six o'clock, and I am home at ten. Such
is my life.

Did I tell you that I had a visit from Tourgueneff? How you would
love him!

Sainte-Beuve gets along. Anyway, I shall see him next week when I am
in Paris for two days, to get necessary information What is the
information about? The national guard!!!

Listen to this: le Figaro not knowing with what to fill its columns,
has had the idea of saying that my novel tells the life of
Chancellor Pasquier. Thereupon, fear of the aforesaid family, which
wrote to another part of the same family living in Rouen, which
latter has been to find a lawyer from whom my brother received a
visit, so that ... in short, I was very stupid not to "get some
benefit from the opportunity." Isn't it a fine piece of idiocy, eh?



C. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, AT CEOISSET
Nohant, 21 December, 1868

Certainly, I am cross with you and angry with you, not from
unreasonableness nor from selfishness, but on the contrary, because
we were joyous and HILARIOUS and you would not distract yourself and
amuse yourself with us. If it was to amuse yourself  elsewhere, you
would be pardoned in advance; but it was to shut yourself up, to get
all heated up, and besides for a work which you curse, and which--
wishing to do and being obliged to do anyhow,--you ought to be able
to do at your ease and without becoming too absorbed in it.

You tell me that you are like that. There is nothing more to say;
but one may well be distressed at having an adored friend, a captive
in chains far away, whom one may not free. It is perhaps a little
coquettish on your part, so as to make yourself pitied and loved the
more. I, who have not buried myself alive in literature, have
laughed and lived a great deal during these holidays, but always
thinking of you and talking  of you with our friend of the Palais
Royal, [Footnote: Jerome Napoleon.]  who would have been happy to
see you and who loves you and appreciates you a great deal.
Tourgueneff has been more fortunate than we, since he was able to
snatch you from your ink-well. I know him personally very little,
but I know his work by heart. What talent! and how original and
polished! I think that the foreigners do better than we do. They do
not pose, while we either put on airs or grovel: the Frenchman has
no longer a social milieu, he has no longer an intellectual milieu.

I except you, you who live a life of exception, and I except myself,
because of the foundation of careless unconventionally which was
bestowed upon me; but I, I do not know how to be "careful" and to
polish, and I love life too much, and I am amused too much by the
mustard and all that is not the real "dinner," to ever be a
litterateur. I have had flashes of it, but they have not lasted.
Existence where one ignores completely one's "moi" is so good, and
life where one does not play a role is such a pretty performance to
watch and to listen to! When I have to give of myself, I live with
courage and resolution, but I am no longer amused.

You, oh! fanatical troubadour, I suspect you of amusing yourself at
your profession more than at anything in the world. In spite of what
you say about it, art could well be your sole passion, and your
shutting yourself up, at which I mourn like the silly that I am,
your state of pleasure. If it is like that then, so much the better,
but acknowledge it to console me.

I am going to leave you in order to dress the marionettes, for the
plays and the laughter have been resumed with the bad weather, and
that will keep us busy for a part of the winter, I fancy. Behold!
here I am, the imbecile that you love, and that you call MASTER. A
fine master who likes to amuse himself better than to work!

Scorn me profoundly, but love me still. Lina tells me to tell you
that you are not much, and Maurice is furious too; but we love you
in spite of ourselves and embrace you just the same. Our friend
Plauchut wants to be remembered to you; he adores you too.

Yours, you huge ingrate,

G. Sand

I had read the hoax of le Figaro and had laughed at it. It turns out
to have assumed grotesque proportions. As for me, they gave me a
grandson instead of two granddaughters, and a Catholic baptism
instead of a Protestant. That does not make any difference. One
really has to lie a little to divert oneself.



CI. TO GEORGE SAND
Saint Sylvester's night, one o'clock, 1869

Why should I not begin the year of 1869 in wishing to you and to
yours "Happy New Year and many of them"? It is rococo, but it
pleases me. Now, let us talk.

No, I don't get into a heat, for I have never been better. They
thought me, in Paris, "fresh as a young girl," and those people who
don't know my life attributed that appearance of health to the air
of the country. That is what conventional ideas are. Every one has
his system. For my part, when I am not hungry, the only thing I can
eat is dry bread. And the most indigestible food, such as apples in
sour cider, and bacon, are what cure me of the stomach-ache. And so
on. A man who has no common sense ought not to try to live according
to common-sense rules.

As for my frenzy for work, I will compare it to an attack of herpes.
I scratch myself while I cry. It is both a pleasure and a torture at
the same time. And I am doing nothing that I want to! For one does
not choose one's subjects, they force themselves on one. Shall I
ever find mine? Will an idea fall from Heaven suitable to my
temperament? Can I write a book to which I shall give myself heart
and soul? It seems to me in my moments of vanity, that I am
beginning to catch a glimpse of what a novel ought to be. But I
still have three or four of them to write before that one (which is,
moreover, very vague), and at the rate I am going, if I write these
three or four, that will be the most I can do. I am like M.
Prudhomme, who thinks that the most beautiful church would be one
which had at the same time the spire of Strasbourg, the colonnade of
Saint Peter's, the portico of the Parthenon, etc. I have
contradictory ideals. Thence embarrassment, hesitation, impotence.

As to whether the "claustration" to which I condemn myself may be a
"state of joy," no. But what can I do? To get drunk with ink is more
worth while than to get drunk with brandy. The muse, cross-grained
as she is, gives less trouble than a woman. I cannot harmonize the
one with the other. I must choose. My choice was made a long time
ago. There remains the matter of the senses. They have always been
my servants. Even at the time of my earliest youth, I did exactly as
I wanted with them. I have reached my fiftieth year, and it is not
their ardor that troubles me.

This regime is not amusing, I agree to that. There are moments of
empty and horrible boredom. But they become more and more rare in
proportion as one grows older. In short, LIVING seems to me a
business for which I was not made, and yet...!

I stayed in Paris for three days, which I made use of in hunting up
information, and in doing errands about my book. I was so worn out
last Friday, that I went to bed at seven o'clock in the evening.
Such are my mad orgies at the capital.

I found the Goncourts in a frenzied (sic) admiration over a book
entitled Histoire de ma vie by George Sand. Which proves more good
taste than learning on their part. They even wanted to write to you
to express all their admiration. (In return I found ***** stupid. He
compares Feydeau to Chateaubriand, admires very much the Lepreux de
la cite d'Aoste, finds Don Quichotte tedious, etc.).

Do you notice how rare literary sense is? The knowledge of language,
archeology, history, etc., all that should be useful however! Well!
well! not at all! The so-called enlightened people are becoming more
and more incompetent in the matter of art. Even what art means
escapes them. The glosses for them are more important than the text.
They pay more attention to the crutches than to the legs themselves.



CII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
1st January, 1869

It is one o'clock, I have just embraced my children. I am tired from
having spent the night in making a complete costume for a large doll
for Aurore; but I don't want to turn in without embracing you also,
my great friend, and my dear, big child. May '69 be easy for you,
and may it see the end of your novel. May you keep well and be
always yourself! I don't know anything better, and I love you.

G. Sand

I have not the address of the Goncourts. Will you put the enclosed
answer in the mail?



CIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 17 January, 1869

The individual named George Sand is well: he is enjoying the
marvelous winter which reigns in Berry, gathering flowers, noting
interesting botanical anomalies, making dresses and mantles for his
daughter-in-law, costumes for the marionettes, cutting out scenery,
dressing dolls, reading music, but above all spending hours with the
little Aurore who is a marvelous child. There is not a more tranquil
or a happier individual in  his domestic life than this old
troubadour retired from business, who sings from time to time his
little song to the moon, without caring much whether he sings well
or ill, provided he sings the motif that runs in his head, and who,
the rest of the time, idles deliciously. It has not always been as
nice as this. He had the folly to be young; but as he did no evil
nor knew evil passions, nor lived for vanity, he is happy enough to
be peaceful and to amuse himself with everything.

This pale character has the great pleasure of loving you with all
his heart, and of not passing a day without thinking of the other
old troubadour, confined in his solitude of a frenzied artist,
disdainful of all the pleasures of this world, enemy of the
magnifying glass and of its attractions. We are, I think, the two
most different workers that exist; but since we like each other that
way, it is all right. The reason each of us  thinks of the other at
the same hour, is because each of us has a need of his opposite; we
complete ourselves, in identifying ourselves at times with what is
not ourselves.

I told you, I think, that I had written a play on returning from
Paris. They liked it; but I don't want them to play it in the
spring, and the end of the winter is filled up, unless the play they
are rehearsing fails. As I do not know how to WISH my colleagues ill
luck, I am in no hurry and my manuscript is on the shelf. I have the
time. I am writing my little annual novel, when I have one or two
hours a day to get to work on it; I am not sorry to be prevented
from thinking of it. That develops it. Always before going to sleep,
I have an agreeable quarter of an hour to continue it in my head;
there you have it.

I know nothing, nothing at all of the Sainte-Beuve incident. I get a
dozen newspapers, whose wrappers I respect to such an extent that
without Lina, who tells me the chief news from time to time, I would
not know if Isidore were still among us.

Sainte-Beuve is very high tempered, and, as regards opinions, so
perfectly skeptical, that I should never be astonished at anything
he did, in one sense or the other. He was not always like that, at
least not so much so. I have known him to be more credulous and more
republican than I was then. He was thin and pale, and gentle; how
people change! His talent, his knowledge, his mind have increased
enormously, but I used to like his character better. Just the same,
there is still much good in him. There is still love and reverence
for letters--and he will be the last of the critics. Criticism
rightly so-called, will disappear. Perhaps there is no longer any
reason for its existence. What do you think about it?

It appears that you are studying the boor (pignouf). As for me, I
avoid him. I know him too well. I love the Berrichon  peasant who is
not, who never is, a boor, even when he is of no great account; the
word pignouf has its depths; it was created exclusively for the
bourgeois, wasn't it? Ninety out of a hundred provincial middle-
class women are boorish (pignouf lardes) to a high degree, even with
pretty faces that ought to give evidence of delicate instincts. One
is surprised to find a basis of gross self-sufficiency in these
false ladies. Where is the woman now? She is becoming a freak in
society.

Good night, my troubadour: I love you, and I embrace you warmly;
Maurice also.

G. Sand



CIV. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Tuesday, 2 February, 1869

My dear master,

You see in your troubadour a worn-out man. I have spent a week in
Paris, looking up wearisome information (from seven to nine hours in
fiacres every day, which is a fine way to make money out of
literature). Oh, well!

I have just reread my outline. All that I have still to write
horrifies me, or rather disgusts me, so that I want to vomit. It is
always so, when I get to work. It is then that I am bored, bored,
bored! But this time exceeds all others. That is why I dread so much
interruptions in the daily grind. I could not do otherwise, however.
I dragged about at funerals at Pere-Lachaise, in the valley of
Montmorency, through shops of religious objects, etc.

In short, I have enough material for four or five months now. What a
big "Hooray" I shall utter, when it is finished, and when I am not
in the midst of remaking the bourgeois! It is high time that I
enjoyed life.

I saw Sainte-Beuve and the Princess Mathilde, and I know thoroughly
the story of their break, which seems to me irrevocable. Sainte-
Beuve was outraged against Dalloz and has gone to le Temps. The
princess begged him not to do anything about it. He did not listen
to her. That is all. My opinion on it, if you wish to know it, is
this. The first wrong was done by the princess, who was hasty; but
the second and the worst was by pere Beuve, who did not behave as a
courteous man. If one has a friend, a rather good fellow, and that
friend has given one thirty thousand francs a year income, one owes
him some consideration. It seems to me that in Sainte-Beuve's place
I should have said, "That displeases you, let us talk no more about
it." He lacked manners and poise. What disgusted me a little,
between ourselves, was the way he praised the emperor to me! yes, he
praised Badinguet, to me!--And we were alone!

The princess had taken the thing too seriously from the beginning.
I wrote to her, saying that Sainte-Beuve was right; he, I am sure,
found me rather cold. It was then, in order to justify himself to
me, that he made these protestations of isidorian love, which
humiliated me a little; for it was as if he took me for a complete
imbecile.

I think that he is preparing for a funeral like Beranger's, and that
Hugo's popularity makes him jealous. Why write for the papers, when
one can make books, and when one is not perishing of hunger? He's no
sage, Sainte-Beuve. Not like you!

Your strength charms me and amazes me. I mean the strength of your
entire being, not only that of your brain.

You speak of criticism in your last letter to me, telling me that it
will soon disappear. I think, on the contrary, that it is, at most,
only at its dawning. They are on a different tack from before, but
nothing more. At the time of La Harpe, they were grammarians; at the
time of Sainte-Beuve and of Taine, they are historians. When will
they be artists, only artists, but really artists? Where do you know
a criticism? Who is there who is anxious about the work in itself,
in an intense way? They analyze very keenly the setting in which it
was written, and the causes that produced it; but the UNCONSCIOUS
poetic expression? Where it comes from? its composition,  its style?
the point of view of the author? Never.

That criticism would require great imagination and great  sympathy.
I mean a faculty of enthusiasm that is always  ready, and then
TASTE, a rare quality, even among the best, so  much so that one
does not talk about it any longer.

What irritates me every day, is to see a master-piece and a
disgrace put on the same level. They exalt the little, and they
lower the great, nothing is more imbecile nor more immoral.

At Pere-Lachaise I was seized with a profound and sorrowful  disgust
for humanity. You can not imagine the fetichism  of the tombs. The
real Parisian is more of an idolater than  a negro is! It made me
long to lie down in one of the graves.

And the PROGRESSIVES think that there is nothing better than to
rehabilitate Robespierre! Note Hamel's book! If the Republic
returned they would bless the liberty poles out of policy and
believing that measure strong.

When shall I see you? I plan to be in Paris from Easter to  the end
of May, This spring I shall go to see you at Nohant,  I swear it.



CV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 11 February, 1869

While you are running around to get material for your novel, I am
inventing all sorts of pretexts not to write mine. I let myself be
distracted by guilty fancies, something I am reading fascinates me
and I set myself to scribbling on paper that will  be left in my
desk and bring me no return. That has amused me, or rather that has
compelled me, for it would be in vain for me to struggle against
these caprices; they interrupt me and force me...you see that I have
not the strength of mind that you think.

As for our masculine friend, he is ungrateful, while our feminine
friend is too exacting. You were right; they are both wrong and it
is not their fault, it is the social machinery which insists on it.
The kind of recognition, that is to say, submission that she exacts,
depends on a tradition that the present time still profits by (there
lies the evil); but does not accept any longer as a duty. The
notions of the obliged are changed, those of the obliger ought to
change also. It must be said that one does not buy moral liberty by
any kindness,--and as for him, he should have foreseen that he would
be considered  enchained. The simplest thing would have been not to
care about having thirty thousand francs a year. It is so easy to do
without it. Let him extricate himself. They won't entangle us in it:
we aren't so foolish!

You say very good things about criticism. But in order to do as you
say, there must be artists, and the artist is too much occupied with
his own work, to forget himself in estimating that of others.

Heavens, what fine weather! Don't you enjoy it, at least from your
window? I'll wager that the tulip tree is in bud. Here, the peaches
and the apricots are in flower. It is said that they will be ruined;
that does not stop them from being pretty and not tormenting
themselves about it.

We have had our family carnival: my niece, my grandchildren,  etc.
We all put on fancy dress; it is not difficult here, one only has to
go to the wardrobe and one comes down again as Cassandra, Scapin,
Mezzetin, Figaro, Basile, etc., all that is very pretty. The pearl
was Lolo as a little Louis XIII in crimson satin, trimmed with white
satin fringed and laced with silver. I spent three days in making
this costume, which was very chic; it was so pretty and so funny on
that little girl of three years, that we were all amazed in looking
at her.

Then we played charades, had supper, and frolicked till daylight.
You see that banished to a desert, we keep up a good  deal of
vitality. And that I delay all I can, the trip to Paris and the
chapter of business. If you were there, I would not need to be
urged. But you are going there the end of March if and I can not
afford to wait till then. To conclude, you swear  to come this
summer and we count on it absolutely. Sooner than not have you come
I shall go to drag you here by the hair.  I embrace you most warmly
on this good hope.

G. Sand



CVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 24 February, 1869

I am all alone at Nohant as you are all alone at Croisset. Maurice
and Lina have gone to Milan, to see Calamatta who is dangerously
ill. Should they have the misfortune to lose him, they will have to
go to Rome to settle his estate, an irksome task added to a sorrow,
it is always like that. That sudden separation was sad, my poor Lina
weeping at leaving her daughters and weeping at not being with her
father. They left me the care of the children whom I rarely leave
and who only let me work when they sleep; but I am happier at having
this care on my shoulders to console me. I have, every day, in two
hours news from Milan by telegram. The patient is better; my
children are only as far as Turin today and do not know yet what I
know. How this telegraph changes one's idea of life, and when the
formalities and formulas are still more simplified, how full
existence will be of facts and how free from uncertainties.

Aurore, who lives on adorations in the lap of her father and  mother
and who weeps every day when I am away, has not asked a single time
where they are. She plays and laughs, then she stops; her great eyes
stare, she says: MY FATHER? another time she says: MAMMA? I distract
her, she thinks no more of it, and then she begins again. They are
very mysterious, children! They think without understanding. Only
one sad word is needed to bring out their sorrow. She carries it
unconsciously. She looks in my eyes to see if I am sad or anxious; I
laugh and she laughs, I think that we must keep her sensitiveness
asleep as long as possible, and that she never would weep for me if
they did not speak of me.

What is your advice, you who have brought up an intelligent and
charming niece? Is it wise to make them loving and affectionate
early? I thought so formerly: I was afraid when I saw Maurice too
impressionable and Solange too much the opposite, and resisting
affection. I would like little ones to be shown only the sweet and
the good of life, until the time when reason can help them to accept
or to fight the bad. What do you say?

I embrace you and ask you to tell me when you are going to Paris, my
trip is delayed as my children may be absent a month; I shall be
able, perhaps, to meet you in Paris.

Your old solitary,

G. Sand

What an admirable definition I rediscover with surprise in the
fatalist Pascal!

"Nature acts progressively, itus et reditus. It goes on and returns,
then it goes still further, then half as far, then further than
ever."  [Footnote: George Sand had copied this and fastened it over
her work table at Nohant.]

What a way of speaking, eh? How the language turns, is twisted, made
supple, is condensed under this grandiose "hand."



CVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Tuesday night

What do I say about it, dear master? Should one excite or repress
the sensitiveness of children? It seems to me that one should not
have any set rule about it. It is according as they have a tendency
to too much or too little. Moreover, the basis  isn't changed. There
are tender natures and hard natures, irremediably so. And then the
same sight, the same lesson can produce opposite effects. Could
anything have hardened me more than having been brought up in a
hospital and having  played, as a child, in a dissecting
amphitheatre? But no one is more sensitive than I am to physical
suffering. It is true  that I am the son of an extremely humane man,
sensitive in the true meaning of the word. The sight of a suffering
dog made tears come to his eyes. He did his surgical operations none
the less well, and he invented some dreadful ones.

"Show little ones only the sweet and the good of life until the time
when reason can help them to accept or to fight the bad." Such is
not my opinion. For then something terrible, an infinite
disenchantment is bound to be produced in their hearts. And then,
how could reason form itself, if it does not apply itself (or if one
does not apply it daily) to distinguish good from evil? Life ought
to be a continual education; one must learn everything--from talking
to dying.

You tell me very true things about the unconsciousness of children.
He who could read clearly in these little brains would grasp in them
the roots of the human race, the origin of the gods, the sap which
produces actions later on, etc. A negro who talks to his idol, and a
child who talks to her doll seem to me close together.

The child and the savage (the primitive) do not distinguish the real
from the fantastic. I remember very clearly that at five or six
years of age I wanted to "send my heart" to a little girl with whom
I was in love (I mean my material heart). I could see it in the
middle of straw, in a basket, an oyster basket.

But no one has been so far as you in these analyses. There are some
infinitely profound pages about it in the Histoire de ma vie. What I
say is true, since minds quite opposite to yours have been amazed at
them. For instance, the Goncourts.

The good Tourgueneff ought to be in Paris at the end of March. What
would be fine, would be for us all three to dine together.

I am thinking again of Sainte-Beuve. Without doubt one can get along
without thirty thousand francs a year. But there is something easier
yet: that is, when one has them, not to launch into abuse, every
week, in the papers. Why doesn't he write books, since he is rich
and has talent?

I am just now reading Don Quichotte again. What a tremendous  old
book! Is there any more beautiful?



CVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 7 March, 1869

Still alone with my grandchildren; my nephews and friends come to
spend two out of every three days with me, but I miss Maurice and
Lina. Poor Calamatta is at the last gasp.

Give me the address of the Goncourts, you have never given it to me.
Shall I never know it? My letter is still waiting there for them.

I love you and embrace you. I love you much, much, and I embrace you
very warmly.

G. Sand



CIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 12 March, 1869

Poor Calamatta died the 9th, my children are coming back. My Lina
must be distressed. I have news from them only by telegraph. From
Milan here in an hour and a half. But there are no details, and I am
anxious. I embrace you tenderly,

G. Sand

Thank you for the address.



CX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 2 April, 1869

Dear friend of my heart, here we are once more calm again. My
children returned to me very exhausted. Aurore has been a little
ill. Lina's mother has come to get into touch with her about their
affairs. She is a loyal and excellent woman, very artistic, and very
amiable. I too have had a bad cold, but everything is getting better
now, and our charming little girls console their little mother. If
it were less bad weather, and I had a less bad cold, I would go at
once to Paris, for I want to see you there. How long do you stay
there? Tell me quickly.

I shall be very glad to renew my acquaintance with Tourgueneff,
whom I knew a little without having read him, and whom I have since
read with a whole-hearted admiration. You seem to me to love him a
great deal; then I love him too, and I wish when your novel is
finished, that you would bring him to our house. Maurice also knows
him and appreciates him greatly, he who likes whatever does not
resemble anything else.

I am working at my novel about TRAVELING ACTORS [Footnote: Pierre
qui roule.] like a convict. I am trying to have it amusing and to
explain art; it is a new form for me and amuses me. Perhaps it will
not have any success. The taste of the day is for marquises and
courtesans; but what difference does that make?--You must find me a
title, which is a resume of that idea: THE MODERN ROMAN COMIQUE.

My children send you affectionate greetings; your old troubadour
embraces his old troubadour.

G. Sand

Answer quickly how long you expect to stay in Paris. You say that
you are paying bills and that you are vexed. If you have need of
quibus, I have at the moment a few sous I can lend you. You know
that you offered once to lend me some. If I had been in a hole I
would have accepted. Give all my regards to Maxime Du Camp and thank
him for not forgetting me.



CXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 17 April, 1869

I am well, I am finishing (today, I hope) my modern Roman  comique
which will be called I don't know what. I am a little  tired, for I
have done a lot of other things. But I am going to Paris in eight or
ten days to rest, to embrace you, to talk of you, of your work, to
forget mine, God be thanked! and to love you as always very much and
very tenderly.

G. Sand

Regards from Maurice and his wife.



CXII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Monday, 26 April, 1869

I arrived last night, I am running around like a rat, but  every day
at 6 o'clock one is sure of finding me at Magny's,  and the first
day that you are free, come to dine with your old  troubadour who
loves you and embraces you.

Send word ahead to me, however, so that by an exceptional chance, I
do not have the ill luck to miss you.

Monday.



CXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Thursday evening, 29 April, 1869

I am back from Palaiseau and I find your letter. Saturday I am not
sure of being free; I have to read my play with Chilly on account of
some objections of detail, and I had told you so. But I see him
tomorrow evening, and I shall try to get him to give me another day.
I shall write you then, tomorrow evening, Friday, and if he frees
me, I shall go to your house about three o'clock on Saturday so that
we can read before and after dinner; I dine on a little fish, a
chicken wing, an ice and a cup of coffee, never anything else, by
which means my stomach keeps well. If I am kept by Chilly, we shall
postpone till next week after Friday.

I sold Palaiseau today to a master shoemaker who has a LEATHER
plaster on his right eye, and who calls the sumachs of the garden,
the schumakre.

Then Saturday morning you shall have word from your old comrade.

G. Sand



CXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
30 April, 1869

No way of going out today. This slavery to one's profession  is
horrid, isn't it? Between now and Friday I shall write to you so
that we can again settle on a day. I embrace you, my old beloved
troubadour.

G. Sand



CXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
3 May, 1869

They are encroaching upon my time more and more. All my days are
full until and including next Sunday.--Tell me quickly if you want
me Monday, a week from today--or if it is another day. Let us fix it
for it is a fact that I don't really know whom to listen to.

Your troubadour who does not want THIS STATE OF AFFAIRS to continue!

G. Sand

Monday.



CXVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 4 May, 1869

On Monday then, and if I have an hour free I shall try to embrace my
troubadour before that. But don't disturb yourself,  I know very
well that one does nothing here that one would like to do. Anyway,
on Monday between three and four, clear out your windpipe so as to
read me a part before dinner.

G. Sand

Tues. evening.



CXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Sunday, 9 May, 1869

Tomorrow, your reverence, I shall go to dine at your house. I shall
be at home every day at five o'clock, but you might meet some guys
whom you dislike. You would much better come to Magny's where you
would find me alone, or with Plauchut, or with friends who are also
yours.

I embrace you. I received today the letter which you wrote to me at
Nohant.

G. Sand



CXVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 18 May, 1869

I saw Levy today, I tested him at first; I saw that he would not
give up his contract at any price. I then said to him many good
things about the book and made the remark that he had gotten it very
cheap. But he said to me, if the book is in two volumes, it will be
20,000 francs, that is agreed. So I suppose that you will have two
volumes, won't you?

However, I persisted and he said to me: If the book is a success,  I
shall not begrudge two or three thousand francs more. I said that
you would not demand anything, that it was not your way of acting,
but that for MY PART, I should insist for you without your
knowledge, and he left me saying: Be easy, I don't say no. Should
the book succeed I will make the author profit by it.

That is all that I have been able to do now, but I will take it up
again at the proper time and place. Leave that to me, I will return
your contract. What day next week will you dine with me at Magny's?
I am a little weary.

You would be very kind to come to read at my house, we should be
alone and one evening will be enough for the rest. Set the day, and
AT SIX THIRTY if that does not bother you. My stomach is beginning
to suffer a little from Paris habits. Your troubadour who loves you,

G. Sand

The rest of the week will finish up Palaiseau, but Sunday if you
like, I am free. Answer if you want Sunday at Magny's at half past
six.



CXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT

Then Monday, I count on you, at half past six; but as I am going to
Palaiseau, I may be a few minutes late or early. The first one at
Magny's must wait for the other. I am looking forward with pleasure
to hearing THE REST. Don't forget the manuscript.

Your troubadour Thursday evening, 20 May, 1869.



CXX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT Paris, 29 May, 1869

Yes, Monday, my dear good friend, I count on you and I embrace you.

G. Sand

I am off for Palaiseau AND IT IS TEN O'CLOCK IN THE MORNING!



CXXI. TO GEORGE SAND

My prophecy is fulfilled; My friend X----has gained only ridicule
with his candidacy. That serves him right. When a man of style
debases himself to practical life, he loses caste and should be
punished. And then, is it a question of politics, now! The citizens
who are excited for or against the Empire or the Republic seem to me
as useful as those who discuss efficacious or efficient grace.
Politics are as dead as theology! They have had three hundred years
of existence, that is quite enough.

Just now I am lost in the Church Fathers. As for my novel
l'Education sentimentale, I am paying no more attention to it, God
be thanked! It is recopied. Other hands have gone over it. So, the
thing is no longer mine. It does not exist any longer, good night. I
have taken up again my old hobby of Saint Antoine. I have reread my
notes, I am making another new plan and I am devouring the
ecclesiastical memoirs of the Nain de Tillemont. I hope to succeed
in finding a logical connection  (and therefore a dramatic interest)
between the different hallucinations of the Saint. This extravagant
setting pleases me and I am absorbed in it, there you are!

My poor Bouilhet bothers me. He is in such a nervous state that they
have advised him to take a little trip to the south of France. He is
overwhelmed by an unconquerable melancholy. Isn't it queer! He who
was so gay, formerly!

My Heavens! What a beautiful and farcical thing is the life of the
desert Fathers! But without doubt they were all Buddhists. That is a
stylish problem to work at, and its solution would be more important
than the election of an academician. Oh! ye men of little faith!
Long live Saint Polycarp!

Fangeat, who has reappeared recently, is the citizen who, on the
25th day of February, 1848, demanded the death of Louis-Philippe
"without a trial." That is the way one serves the cause of progress.



CXXII. TO GEORGE SAND

What a good and charming letter was yours, adored master! There is
no one but you! upon my word of honor! I am ending by believing it.
A wind of stupidity and folly is now blowing over the world. Those
who stand up firm and straight against it are rare.

This is what I meant when I wrote that the times of politics were
over. In the 18th century the chief business was diplomacy.  "The
secrecy of the cabinets" really existed. The peoples still were
sufficiently amenable to be separated and to be combined. That order
of things seems to me to have said its last word in 1815. Since
then, one has hardly done anything except dispute about the external
form that it is fitting to give the fantastic and odious being
called the State.

Experience proves (it seems to me) that no form contains the best in
itself; orleanism, republic, empire do not mean anything anymore,
since the most contradictory ideas can enter into each one of these
pigeon holes. All the flags have been so soiled with blood and with
filth that it is time not to have any at all. Down with words! No
more symbols nor fetiches! The great moral of this reign will be to
prove that universal suffrage is as senseless as the divine right
although a little less odions!

The question is then out of place. One is concerned no longer with
dreaming of the best form of government, since all are equal, but
with making science prevail. That is the most important. The rest
will follow inevitably. Purely intellectual men have rendered more
service to the human race than all the Saint Vincent de Pauls in the
world! And politics will be an everlasting folly so long as it is
not subordinate to science. The government of a country ought to be
a section of the Institute, and the last section of all.

Before concerning yourself with relief funds, and even with
agriculture, send to all the villages in France, Robert Houdins to
work miracles! The greatest crime of Isidore is the wretched
condition in which he leaves our beautiful country. Dixi.  I admire
Maurice's occupations and his healthy life. But I am not capable of
imitating him. Nature, far from fortifying me, drains my strength.
When I lie on the grass I feel as if I am already under the earth
and that the roots of green things are beginning to grow in my
belly. Your troubadour is naturally an unhealthy man. I do not like
the country except when travelling, because then the independence of
my individuality causes me to rise above the knowledge of my
nothingness.



CXXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 6 August, 1869

Well, dear good friend, here it is August, and you have promised to
come. We don't forget it, we count on it, we dream of it, and we
talk of it every day. You were to take a trip to the seashore first
if I am not mistaken. You must need to shake up your gloom. That
does not dispel it, but it does force it to live with us and not be
too oppressive. I have thought a great deal about you lately, I
would have hastened to see you if I had not thought I should find
you surrounded by older and better friends than I am. I wrote you at
the same time that you wrote me, our letters crossed.

Come to see us, my dear old friend, I shall not go to Paris this
month, I do not want to miss you. My children will be happy to spoil
you and to try to distract you. We all love you, and I love you
PASSIONATELY, as you know.



CXXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 14 August, 1869

Your change of plans distresses us, dear friend, but we do not dare
to complain in the face of your anxieties and sorrows. We ought to
wish you to do what would distract you the most, and take the least
out of you. I am in hopes of finding you in Paris, as you are
staying there some time and I always have business there. But it is
so hard to see friends in Paris and one is so overwhelmed by so many
tedious duties! Well, it is a real sorrow to me not to have to
expect you any more at our house, where each one of us would have
tried to love you better than the others and where you would have
been at home; sad when you wanted to be, busy if you liked. I resign
myself on condition that you will be better off somewhere else and
that you will make it good to us when you can.

Have you at least arranged your affairs with Levy? Is he paying you
for two volumes? I would like you to have something on which to live
independently and as master of your time. Here there is repose for
the mind in the midst of the exuberant activities of Maurice, and of
his brave little wife who sets herself to love all he loves and to
help him eagerly in all he undertakes. As for me, I have the
appearance of incarnate idleness in the midst of this hard work. I
botanize and I bathe in a little icy torrent. I teach my servant to
read, I correct proof and I am well. That is my life and nothing
bores me in this world where I think that AS FAR AS I AM CONCERNED
all is for the best. But I am afraid of becoming more of a bore than
I used to be. People don't like such as I am very much. We are too
inoffensive. However, love me still a little, for I feel by the
disappointment of not seeing you, that it would have gone hard with
me if you had meant to break your word.

And I embrace you tenderly, dear old friend.

G. Sand



CXXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Thursday

I know nothing either of Chilly or la petite Fadette. In a few days
I am going to make a tour of Normandy. I shall go through Paris. If
you want to come around with me,--oh! but no, you don't travel
about; well, we shall see each other in passing. I have certainly
earned a little holiday. I have worked like a beast of burden. I
need too to see some blue, but the blue of the sea will do, and you
would like the blue of the artistic and literary firmament over our
heads. Bah! that doesn't exist. Everything is prose, flat prose in
the environment in which mankind has settled itself. It is only in
isolating oneself a little that one can find in oneself the normal
being again.

I am resuming my letter interrupted for two days by my wounded hand
which inconveniences me a good deal. I am not going to Normandy at
all, my Lamberts whom I was going to see in Yport came back to Paris
and my business calls me there too. I shall then see you next week
probably, and I shall embrace you as if you were my dear big child.
Why can't I put the rosy, tanned face of Aurore in the place of
mine! She is not what you would call pretty, but she is adorable and
so quick in comprehending that we all are astonished. She is as
amusing in her chatter as a person,--who might be amusing. So I am
going to be forced to start thinking about my business! It is the
one thing of which I have a horror and which really troubles my
serenity. You must console me by joking with me a little when you
have the time.

I shall see you soon, have courage in the sickening work of proof-
reading. As for me I hurry over it quickly and badly, but you must
not do as I do.

My children send you their love and your troubadour loves you.

G. Sand

Saturday evening

I have just received news from the Odeon. They are at work putting
on my play and do not speak of anything else.



CXXVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 6 September, 1869

They wrote me yesterday to come because they wanted me at the Opera-
Comique. Here I am rue Gay-Lussac. When shall we meet? Tell me. All
my days, are still free.

I embrace you.

G. Sand



CXXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 8 September, 1869

I send you back your handkerchief which you left in the carriage. It
is surely tomorrow THURSDAY that we dine together?  I have written
to the big Marchal to come to Magny's too.

Your troubadour

G. Sand

Wednesday morning.



CXXVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, Tuesday, 5 October, 1869

Where are you now, my dear troubadour? I am still writing to you at
the boulevard du Temple, but perhaps you have taken possession of
your delightful lodgings. I don't know the address although I have
seen the house, the situation and the view.--I have been twice in
the Ardennes and in a week or ten days, if Lina or Maurice does not
come to Paris, as they have a slight desire to do, I shall leave
again for Nohant.

We must then meet and see each other. Here am I a little sfogata
(eased) from my need for travel, and enchanted with what I have
seen. Tell me what day except tomorrow, Wednesday,  you can give me
for dinner at Magny's or elsewhere with or without Plauchut, with
whomever you wish provided I see you and embrace you.

Your old comrade who loves you.

G. Sand



CXXIX. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear good adored master,

I have wanted for several days to write you a long letter in which I
should tell you all that I have felt for a month. It is funny. I
have passed through different and strange states. But I have neither
the time nor the repose of mind to gather myself together enough.

Don't be disturbed about your troubadour. He will always have "his
independence and his liberty" because he will always do as he has
always done. He has left everything rather than submit to any
obligation whatsoever, and then, with age, one's needs lessen. I
suffer no longer from not living in the Alhambra.

What would do me good now, would be to throw myself furiously into
Saint-Antoine, but I have not even the time to read.

Listen to this: in the very beginning, your play was to come after
Aisse; then it was agreed that it should come BEFORE. Now Chilly and
Duquesnel want it to come after, simply and solely "to profit by the
occasion," to profit by my poor Bouilhet's death. They will give you
a "sort of compensation." Well, I am the owner and the master of
Aisse just as if I were the author, and I do not want that. You
understand, I do not want you to inconvenience yourself in anything.

You think that I am as sweet as a lamb! Undeceive yourself, and act
as if Aisse had never existed; and above all no sensitiveness?  That
would offend me. Between simple friends, one needs manners and
politenesses; but between you and me, that would not seem at all
suitable; we do not owe each other anything at all except to love
each other.

I think that the directors of the Odeon will regret Bouilhet in
every way. I shall be less easy than he was at rehearsals. I should
very much like to read Aisse to you so as to talk a little about it;
some of the actors whom they propose are, to my way of thinking,
impossible. It is hard to have to do with uneducated people.



CXXX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Wednesday evening, 13 October, 1869

Our poor friend is not to be buried till the day after tomorrow,
they will let me know where and when we ought to be there, I shall
tell you by telegram.

I have seen the directors twice. It was agreed this morning with
Duquesnel that they should make an attempt with de la T(our) Saint-
Y(bars). I yielded my turn to Aisse. I was not to come till March. I
went back there this evening, Chilly IS UNWILLING, and Duquesnel,
better informed than this morning, regards the step as useless and
harmful. I then quoted my contract, my right. What a fine thing, the
theatre! M. Saint-Ybars' contract antedates mine. They had thought
le Batard would last two weeks and it will last forty days longer.
Then La Tour Saint-Ybars precedes us [Footnote: This refers to
l'Affranchi.] and I can not give up my turn to Aisse without being
postponed till next year, which I'll do if you want me to; but it
would do me a good deal of harm, for I have gotten into debt with
the Revue and I must refill my purse.--Are directors rascals in all
that? No, but incompetents who are always afraid of not having
enough plays, and accept too many, foreseeing that they will have
failures.--When they are successful, if the authors contracted for
are ANGRY they have to go to court. I have no taste for disputes and
the scandals of the side-scenes and the newspapers; and neither have
you. What would be the result? Inadequate compensation and a deal of
uproar for nothing. One needs patience in any event, I have it, and
I tell you again if you are really upset at this delay, I am ready
to sacrifice myself.

With this I embrace you and I love you.

G. Sand



CXXXI. TO GEORGE SAND
14 October, 1869

Dear master,

No! no sacrifices! so much the worse! If I did not look at
Bouilhet's affairs as mine absolutely, I should have at once
accepted your proposition. But: (1) it is my affair, (2) the dead
must not hurt the living.

But I am angry at these gentlemen, I do not hide it from you, for
not having said anything to us about Latour Saint-Ybars. For the
aforesaid Latour was engaged a long time ago. Why did we not know
anything about him?

In short, let Chilly write me the letter on which we agreed
Wednesday, and let there be no more discussion about it.

It seems to me that your play can be given the 15th of December, if
l'Affranchi begins about the 20th of November. Two and a half months
are about fifty performances; if you go beyond that, Aisse will not
be presented till next year.

Then, it is agreed, since we can not suppress Latour Saint-Ybars;
you shall go after him and Aisse next, if I think it suitable.

We shall meet Saturday at poor Sainte-Beuve's funeral. How the
little band diminishes! How the few survivors of the Medusa's raft
are disappearing!

A thousand affectionate greetings.



CXXXII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 20 or 21 October, 1869

Impossible, dear old beloved. Brebant is too far, I have so little
time. And then I have made an engagement with Marchal and Berton at
Magny's to say farewell. If you can come, I shall be very happy and
on the other hand if it is going to make you ill, don't come, I know
very well that you love me and shall not be angry with you about
anything.

G. Sand



CXXXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 15 Nov., 1869

What has become of you, my dear old beloved troubadour? are you
correcting proof like a galley slave, up to the last minute? For the
last two days they have been announcing your book FOR TOMORROW. I am
looking for it with impatience, for you are not going to forget me,
are you? You will be praised and condemned; you expect that. You are
too truly superior not to arouse envy and you don't care, do you?
Nor I either for you. You have the strength to be stimulated by what
discourages others. There will certainly be a rumpus; your subject
will be quite opportune in this time of REVOLUTIONISTS. The good
progressives, the true democrats will approve of you. The idiots
will be furious, and you will say: "Come weal, come woe!"  I am also
correcting proof of Pierre qui roule and I have half finished a new
novel which will not make much of a stir; that is all that I ask for
at the moment. I work alternately on MY novel, the one that I like,
and on the one that the Revue does not dislike as much, but which I
like very little. It is arranged that way; I don't know if I am
making a mistake. Perhaps those which I like are the worst. But I
have stopped worrying about myself, so far as I have ever done so.
Life has always taken me out of myself, and so it will to the end.
My heart is always affected to the detriment of my head. At present
it is my little children who devour all my intellect; Aurore is a
jewel, a nature before which I bow in admiration; will it last like
that?

You are going to spend the winter in Paris, and I, I don't know when
I shall go. The success of le Batard continues; but I am not
impatient, you have promised to come as soon as you are free, at
Christmas at the very latest, to keep revel with us. I think only of
that, and if you break your word we shall be in despair here. With
this I embrace you with a full heart as I love you.

G. Sand



CXXXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Paris
Nohant, 30 November, 1869

Dear friend of my heart, I wanted to reread your book [Footnote:
l'Education sentimentale.]; my daughter-in-law has read it too, and
some of my young people, all readers in earnest and of the first
rank and not stupid at  all. We are all of the same opinion, that it
is a beautiful book, equal in strength to the best ones of Balzac
and truer, that is to say more faithful to the truth from one end to
the other.

One needs the great art, the exquisite form and the severity of your
work to do without flowers of fancy. However, you throw poetry with
a full hand on your picture, whether your characters understand it
or not. Rosanette at Fontainebleau does not know on what grass she
walks and nevertheless she is poetic.

All that issues from a master's hand, and your place is well won for
always. Live then as calmly as possible in order to last a long time
and to produce a great deal.

I have seen two short articles which did not seem to me to rebel
against your success; but I hardly know what is going on, politics
seems to me to absorb everything.

Keep me posted. If they did not do justice to you I should be angry
and should say what I think. It is my right.

I don't know exactly when, but during the month, I shall go without
doubt to embrace you and to get you, if I can pry you loose from
Paris. My children still count on it, and all of us send you our
praises and our affectionate greetings.

Yours, your old troubadour

G. Sand



CXXXV. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear good master,

Your old troubadour is vehemently slandered by the papers. Read the
Constitutionnel of last Monday, the Gaulois of this morning, it is
blunt and plain. They call me idiotic and common. Barbey
d'Aurevilly's article (Constitutionnel) is a model of this
character, and the good Sarcey's, although less violent, is in no
way behind it. These gentlemen object in the name of morality and
the Ideal! I have also been annihilated in le Figaro and in Paris,
by Cesana and Duranty. I most profoundly don't care a fig! but that
does not make me any the less astonished by so much hatred and bad
faith.

La Tribune, le Pays and l'Opinion nationale on the other hand have
highly praised me...As for the friends, the persons who received a
copy adorned by my hand, they have been afraid of compromising
themselves and have talked to me of
other things. The brave are few. The book is selling very well
nevertheless, in spite of politics, and Levy appears satisfied.

I know that the bourgeois of Rouen are furious with me "because of
pere Roque and the cancan at the Tuileries." They think that one
ought to prevent the publication of books like that (textual), that
I lend a hand to the Reds, that I am capable of inflaming
revolutionary passions, etc., etc. In short, I have received very
few laurels, up to now, and no rose leaf hurts me.

I told you, didn't I, that I was working over the fairy play? I am
doing now a description of the races and I have cut out all that
seemed to me hackneyed. Raphael Felix didn't seem to me eager to
become acquainted with it. Problem!

All the papers cite as a proof of my depravity, the episode of the
Turkish woman, which they misrepresent, naturally; and Sarcey
compares me to Marquis de Sade, whom he confesses he has not read!

All that does not upset me at all. But I wonder what use there is in
printing my book?



CXXXVI. TO GEORGE SAND
Tuesday, 4 o'clock, 7 December, 1869

Dear master,

Your old troubadour is being jumped on in an unheard of manner.
Those people who have read my novel are afraid to talk to me of it
lest they compromise themselves or out of pity for me. The more
indulgent declare I have made only pictures and that both
composition and plan are quite lacking.

Saint-Victor, who puffs the books of Arsene Houssaye, won't write
articles on mine, finding it too bad. There you are. Theo is away,
and no one, absolutely no one takes my defense.

Another story: yesterday Raphael and Michel Levy listened to the
reading of the fairy play. Applause, enthusiasm. I saw the moment
during the reading in which the contract was going to be signed.
Raphael so well understood the play that he gave me two or three
EXCELLENT criticisms. I found him in other ways a charming boy. He
asked me until Saturday to give me a definite answer. Then a little
while ago, a letter (very polite) from the aforesaid Raphael in
which he declares that the fairy play would entail expenses that
would be too much for him.

Ditched again. I must look elsewhere. Nothing new at the Odeon.

Sarcey has published a second article against me.

Barbey d'Aurevilly claims that I dirty a stream by washing myself in
it (sic). All that does not bother me at all.



CXXXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Thursday, two o'clock in the morning, December 9, 1869

My comrade, it is finished, the article shall go tomorrow. I address
it to whom? Answer by telegram. I have a mind to send it to
Girardin. But perhaps you have a better idea, I really don't know
the importance and the credit of the various papers. Send me a
suitable name and ADDRESS by telegram; I have Girardin's.

I am not content with my prose, I have had the fever and a sort of
sprain for two days. But we must make haste. I embrace you.

G. Sand



CXXXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
10 December, Friday, 10 o'clock in the evening, 1869

Dear master, good as good bread,

I have just sent you by telegraph this message: "To Girardin." La
Liberte will publish your article, at once. What do you think of my
friend Saint-Victor, who has refused to write an article about it
because he finds "the book bad"? you have not such a conscience as
that, have you?

I continue to be rolled in the mud. La Gironde calls me Prudhomme.
That seems new to me.

How shall I thank you? I feel the need of saying affectionate
things to you. I have so many in my heart that not one comes to the
tips of my fingers. What a splendid woman you are and what a
splendid man! To say nothing of all the other things!



CXXXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, Friday to Saturday during the night, 10 to 11 December, 1869

I have rewritten my article [Footnote: The article, Sur l'Education
sentimentale, de Flaubert, was printed in the Questions d'art et de
litterature, Calmann-Levy, p. 415.] today and this evening, I am
better, it is clearer. I am expecting your telegram tomorrow. If you
do not put your veto on it, I shall send the article to Ulbach, who
begins his paper the 15th of this month; he wrote to me this morning
to beg me urgently for any article I would send him. I think this
first number will be widely read, and it would be good publicity.
Michel Levy would be a better judge than we as to what is the best
to do: consult him.

You seem astonished at the ill will. You are too simple. You do not
know how original your book is, and how many personal feelings must
be offended by the force it contains. You think you are doing things
that will pass as a letter in the mail; ah! well, yes!

I have insisted on the PLAN of your book; that is what they
understand the least and it is what is the most important. I tried
to show the ordinary people how they should read; for it is the
ordinary people who make successes. The clever ones don't like the
successes of others. I don't pay attention to the malicious; it
would honor them too much.

G. S.

My mother has your telegram and is sending her manuscript to
Girardin.

4 o'clock in the afternoon.

Lina



CXL. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 14 December, 1869

I do not see my article coming out, but others are appearing which
are bad and unjust. One's enemies are always better served than
one's friends. And then, when one frog begins to croak, all the
others follow suit. After a certain reverence has been violated
every one tries to see who can best jump on the shoulders of the
statue; it is always like that. You are undergoing the disadvantages
of having a style that is not yet familiar through repetition, and
all are making idiots of themselves so as not to see it.

ABSOLUTE IMPERSONALITY is debatable, and I do not accept it
ABSOLUTELY; but I wonder that Saint-Victor who has preached it so
much and has criticised my plays because they were not IMPERSONAL,
should abandon you instead of defending you. Criticism is in a sad
way; too much theory!

Don't be troubled by all that and keep straight on. Don't attempt a
system, obey your inspiration.

What fine weather, at least with us, and we are getting ready for
our Christmas festivals with the family at home. I told Plauchut to
try to carry you off; we are expecting him. If you can't come with
him, come at least for the Christmas Eve revels and to escape from
Paris on New Year's day; it is so boring there then!

Lina charges me to say to you that you are authorized to wear your
wrapper and slippers continually. There are no ladies, no strangers.
In short you will make us very happy and you have promised for a
long time.

I embrace you and I am still more angry than you at these attacks,
but I am not overcome, and if I had you here we should stimulate
each other so well that you would start off again at once on the
other leg to write a new novel.

I embrace you.

Your old troubadour,

G. Sand



CXLI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 17 December, 1869

Plauchut writes us that YOU PROMISE to come the 24th. Do come the
23d in the evening, so as to be rested for the night of the 24th to
the 25th and join in our Christmas Eve revels. Otherwise you will
arrive from Paris tired and sleepy and our follies will not amuse
you. You are coming to the house of children, I warn you, and as you
are kind and affectionate, you love children. Did Plauchut tell you
to bring a wrapper and slippers, for we do not want to sentence you
to dressing up? I add that I am counting on your bringing some
manuscript.  The FAIRY PLAY re-done, Saint-Antoine, whatever you
have finished. I hope indeed that you are in the mood for work.
Critics are a challenge that stimulates.

Poor Saint-Rene Taillandier is as asininely pedantic as the Revue.
Aren't they prudish in that set? I am in a pet with Girardin. I know
very well that I am not strong in letters; I am not sufficiently
cultivated for these gentlemen; but the good public reads me and
listens to me all the same.

If you did not come, we should be unhappy and you would be a big
ingrate. Do you want me to send a carriage for you to Chateauroux on
the 23d at four o'clock? I am afraid that you may be uncomfortable
in that stage-coach which makes the run, and it is so easy to spare
you two and a half hours of discomfort!

We embrace you full of hope. I am working like an ox so as to have
my novel finished and not to have to think of it a minute when you
are here.

G. Sand



CXLII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 19 December, 1869

So women are in it too? Come, forget that persecution here, at a
hundred thousand leagues from Parisian and literary life, or rather
come be glad of it, for these great slatings are the sure proof of
great worth. Tell yourself indeed that those who have not gone
through that are GOOD FOR THE ACADEMY.

Our letters crossed. I begged you and I beg you again not to come
Christmas Eve, but the night before so as to join in the revels the
next night, the Eve, that is to say, the 24th. This is the program:
we dine promptly at six o'clock, we have the Christmas tree and the
marionettes for the children, so, that they can go to bed at nine
o'clock. After that we chatter, and sup at midnight. But the
diligence gets here at the earliest at half past six, and we should
not dine till seven o'clock, which would make impossible the great
joy of our little ones who would be kept up too late. So you must
start Thursday 23d at nine o'clock in the morning, so that everyone
may be perfectly comfortable, so that everyone may have time to
embrace everyone else, and so that no one may be interrupted in the
joy of your arrival on account of the imperious and silly darlings.

You must stay with us a very long time, a very long time, we shall
have some more follies for New Year's day, and for Twelfth Night.
This is a crazy happy house and it is the time of holiday after
work. I am finishing tonight my year's task.  Seeing you, dear old
well-beloved friend, would be my recompense: do not refuse me.

G. Sand

Plauchut is hunting today with the prince, and perhaps will not
return till Tuesday. I am writing him to wait for you till Thursday,
you will be less bored on the way. I have just written to Girardin
to complain.



CXLIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
31 December, 1869

We hoped to have a word from you this morning. This sudden cold is
so severe, I dreaded it for your trip. We know you got to
Chateauroux all right. But did you find a compartment, and didn't
you suffer on the way? Reassure us.

We were so happy to have you with us that we should be distressed if
you had to suffer for this WINTER escapade. All goes well here and
all of us adore one another. It is New Year's Eve. We send your
share of the kisses that we are giving one another.

G. Sand



CXLIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 9 January, 1870

I have had so much proof to correct that I am stupefied with it. I
needed that to console me for your departure, troubadour of my
heart, and for another departure also, that of my drudge of a
Plauchmar--and still another departure, that of my grand-nephew
Edme, my favorite, the one who played the marionettes with Maurice.
He has passed his examinations for collector and goes to Pithiviers-
-unless by pull, we could get him as substitute at La Chatre.

Do you know M. Roy, the head of the management of the domains? If by
chance the princess knew him and would be willing to say a word to
him in favor of young Simonnet? I should be happy to owe her this
joy for his family and this economy for his mother who is poor. It
appears that it is very easy to obtain and that no rule opposes it.
But one must HAVE PULL; a word to the princess, a line from M. Roy
and our tears would change to joy.

That child is very dear to me. He is so loving and so good! They had
hard work to bring him up, he was always ill, always dandled on the
knees and always gentle and sweet. He has a great deal of
intelligence and he works well at La Chatre, where his chief the
collector adores him and mourns for him also. Well, do what you can,
if you can do anything at all.

They continue to damn your book. That doesn't prevent it from being
a fine and good book. Justice will come later, JUSTICE IS ALWAYS
DONE. Apparently it did not come at the right moment, or rather it
came too soon. It has demonstrated too well the disorder that reigns
in people's minds. It has rubbed the open wound, people recognize
themselves too well in it.

Everyone adores you here and our consciences are too pure to be
upset at the truth: we talk of you every day. Yesterday, Lina said
to me that she admired very much all you do, but that she preferred
Salammbo to your modern descriptions. If you had been in a corner,
this is what you would have heard from her, from me, and from THE
OTHERS:

"He is taller and larger than the average person. His mind is like
him, beyond ordinary proportions. In that he is like Victor Hugo, at
least as much as like Balzac, but he has the taste and discernment
that Hugo lacks, and he is an artist which Balzac was not.--Is he
then more than both? Chi lo sa?--He hasn't let himself out yet. The
enormous volume of his brain troubles him. He doesn't know if he is
a poet or a realist; and the fact that he is both, hinders him.--He
must get straightened out in his different lines of effort. He sees
everything and wants to grasp everything at once.--He is not the cut
of the public that wants to eat in little mouthfuls, whom large
pieces choke. But the public will go to him, just the same, when it
understands.--It will even go rather quickly if the author
CONDESCENDS to be willing to be quite understood.--For that, perhaps
there will have to be asked some concessions to the indolence of its
mind. One ought to reflect before daring to give this advice."

That sums up what we said. It is not useless to know the opinion of
good people and of young people. The youngest say that l'Education
sentimentale made them sad. They did not come across themselves in
it, they who have not yet lived; but they have illusions and they
say: "Why does this man, so good, so kind, so gay, so simple, so
sympathetic, wish to discourage us from living?" What they say is
poorly reasoned out, but as it is instinctive, perhaps it ought to
be taken into account.

Aurore talks of you and still cradles her baby in her lap; Gabrielle
calls Punch, HER LITTLE ONE, and will not eat her dinner unless he
is opposite her. They are our continual idols, these brats.

Yesterday, I received, after your letter of the day before, a letter
from Berton, who thinks that they will not play l'Affranchi longer
than the 18th or the 20th. Wait for me, since you can delay your
departure a little. It is too bad weather to go to Croisset; it is
always an effort for me to leave my dear nest to go to attend to my
miserable profession; but the effort is less when I hope to find you
in Paris.

I embrace you for myself and for all my brood.

G. Sand



CXLV. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday afternoon.

Dear master,

Your commission was done yesterday at one o'clock. The princess in
my presence took some notes on what you wanted, in order to look
after it at once. She seemed to me very glad to do you a service.

People talk of nothing but the death of Noir! The general sentiment
is fear, nothing else!

Into what miserable ways we are plunged! There is so much imbecility
in the air that one gets ferocious. I am less indignant than
disgusted! What do you think of these gentlemen who come to confer
armed with pistols and sword canes! And of this person, of this
prince, who lives in the midst of an arsenal and makes use of it?
Pretty! Pretty!

What a sweet letter you wrote me day before yesterday! But your
friendship blinds you, dear good master. I do not belong to the
tribe you mention. I am acquainted with myself,  I know what I lack!
And I am enormously lacking.

In losing my poor Bouilhet, I lost my midwife, it was he who saw
into my thought more clearly than I did myself. His death has left a
void that I notice more each day. What is the use of making
concessions? Why force oneself? I am quite resolved, on the
contrary, to write in future for my personal  satisfaction, and
without any constraint. Come what may!



CXLVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 15 January, 1870

L'Affranchi is for Tuesday. I am working hurriedly to finish my
corrections and I leave Tuesday morning. Come to dine with me at
Magny's at six o'clock. Can you? If not, am I to keep a seat for you
in my box? A word during the day of Tuesday, to my lodgings. You
won't be forced to swallow down the entire performance if it bores
you.

I love you and I embrace you for myself and for my brood. Thank you
for Edme.

G. Sand



CXLVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 19 January, 1870

Dear friend of my heart, I did not see you in the theatre. The play
applauded and hissed, more applauded than hissed. Barton very
beautiful, Sarah very pretty, but no interest in the characters and
too many second-rate actors, not good.--I do not think that it is a
success.

I am better. Yet I am not bold enough to go to your house Saturday
and to return from such a distance in this severe cold. I saw Theo
this evening, I told him to come to dine with us both on Saturday at
Magny's. Do say yes, it is I who invite you, and we shall have a
quiet private room. After that we will smoke at my place.

Plauchut would not be able to go to you. He was invited to the
prince's.

A word if it is NO. Nothing if it is yes. So I don't want you to
write to me. I saw Tourgueneff and I told him all that I think of
him. He was as surprised as a child. We spoke ill of you.

Wednesday evening.



CXLVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
The 5th or the 6th February, 1870

(On the back of a letter from Edme Simonnet)

I don't see you, you come to the Odeon and when they tell me that
you are there, I hurry and don't find you. Do set a day then when
you will come to eat a chop with me. Your old exhausted troubadour
who loves you.



CXLIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 15 February, 1870

My troubadour, we are two old rattle traps. As for me, I have had a
bad attack of bronchitis and I am just out of bed. Now I am
recovered but not yet out of my room. I hope to resume my work at
the Odeon in a couple of days.

Do get well, don't go out, at least unless the thaw is not very bad.
My play is for the 22d. [Footnote: This refers to L'Autre.] I hope
very much to see you on that day. And meanwhile, I kiss you and I
love you,

G. Sand

Tuesday evening



CL. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Sunday evening, 20th February, 1870

I went out today for the first time, I am better without being well.
I am anxious at not having news about that reading of the fairy
play. Are you satisfied? Did they understand? L'Autre will take
place on Thursday, or Friday at the latest.

Will your nephew and niece go to the gallery or the balcony seats?
Impossible to have a box. If yes, a word and I will send these seats
out of my allotment--which, as usual, will not be grand.

Your old troubadour.



CLI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, February, 1870

It is for Friday. Then I am disposing of the two seats that I
intended for your niece.

If you have a moment free, and come to the Odeon that night, you
will find me in the manager's box, proscenium, ground floor. I am
heavy-hearted about all you tell me. Here you are again in gloom,
sorrow and chagrin. Poor dear friend! Let us continue to hope that
you will save your patient, but you are ill too, and I am very
anxious about you, I was quite overwhelmed by it this evening, when
I got your note, and I have no more heart for anything.

A word when you can, to give me news.

G. Sand



CLII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, 2d March, 1870

Poor dear friend, your troubles distress me, you have too many blows
in quick succession, and I am going away Saturday morning leaving
you in the midst of all these sorrows! Do you want to come to Nohant
with me, for a change of air, even if only for two or three days? I
have a compartment, we should be alone and my carriage is waiting
for me at Chateauroux.  You could be sad without constraint at our
house, we also have mourning in the family. A change of lodging, of
faces, of habits, sometimes does physical good. One does not forget
one's sorrow, but one forces one's body to endure it.

I embrace you with all my soul. A word and I expect you. Wednesday
evening.



CLIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 11 March, 1870

How are you, my poor child? I am glad to be here in the midst of my
darling family, but I am unhappy all the same at having left you
melancholy, ill and upset. Send me news, a word at least, and be
assured that we all are unhappy over your troubles and sufferings.

G. Sand



CLIV. TO GEORGE SAND
17 March, 1870

Dear master,

I received a telegram yesterday evening from Madame Cornu containing
these words: "Come to me, urgent business." I therefore hurried to
her today, and here is the story.

The Empress maintains that you made some very unkind allusions to
her in the last number of the Revue! "What about me, whom all the
world is attacking now! I should not have believed that! and I
wanted to have her nominated for the Academy! But what have I done
to her? etc., etc."  In short, she is distressed, and the Emperor
too! He is not indignant  but prostrated (sic). [Footnote: Malgre
tout, Calmann-Levy, 1870.]

Madame Cornu explained to her that she was mistaken and that you had
not intended to make any allusion to her.

Hereupon a theory of the manner in which novels are written.

--Oh well, then, let her write in the papers that she did not intend
to wound me.

--But she will not do that, I answered.

--Write to her to tell you so.

--I will not allow myself to take that step.

--But I would like to know the truth, however! Do you know someone
who...then Madame Cornu mentioned me.

--Oh, don't say that I spoke to you of it!

Such is the dialogue that Madame Cornu reported to me.

She wants you to write me a letter in which you tell me that the
Empress was not used by you as a model. I shall send that letter to
Madame Cornu who will have it given to the Empress.

I think that story stupid and those people are very sensitive! Much
worse things than that are told to us.

Now dear master of the good God, you must do exactly what you
please.

The Empress has always been very kind to me and I should not be
sorry to do her a favor. I have read the famous passage.  I see
nothing in it to hurt her. But women's brains are so queer!

I am very tired in mine (my brain) or rather it is very low for the
moment! However hard I work, it doesn't go! Everything irritates me
and hurts me; and since I restrain myself before people, I give way
from time to time to floods of tears when it seems to me as if I
should burst. At last I am experiencing an entirely new sensation:
the approach of old age. The shadow invades me, as Victor Hugo would
say.

Madame Cornu has spoken to me enthusiastically of a letter you wrote
her on a method of teaching.



CLV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 17 March, 1870

I won't have it, you are not getting old. Not in the crabbed and
MISANTHROPIC sense. On the contrary, when one is good, one becomes
better, and, as you are already better than most others, you ought
to become exquisite.

You are boasting, moreover, when you undertake to be angry against
everyone and everything. You could not. You are weak before sorrow,
like all affectionate people. The strong are those who do not love.
You will never be strong, and that is so much the better. You must
not live alone any more; when strength returns you must really live
and not shut it up for yourself alone.

For my part, I am hoping that you will be reborn with the
springtime. Today we have rain which relaxes, tomorrow we shall have
the animating sun. We are all just getting over illnesses, our
children had very bad colds, Maurice quite upset by lameness with a
cold, I taken again by chills and anemia: I am very patient and I
prevent the others as much as I can from being impatient, there is
everything in that; impatience with evil always doubles the evil.
When shall we be WISE as the ancients understood it? That, in
substance, meant being PATIENT, nothing else. Come, dear troubadour,
you must be a little patient, to begin with, and then you can get
accustomed to it; if we do not work on ourselves, how can we hope to
be always in shape to work on others?

Well, in the midst of all that, don't forget that we love you and
that the hurt you give yourself hurts us too.

I shall go to see you and to shake you as soon as I have regained my
feet and my will, which are both backward; I am  waiting, I know
that they will return.

Affectionate greetings from all our invalids. Punch has lost only
his fiddle and he is still smiling and well gilded. Lolo's baby has
had misfortunes, but its clothes dress other dolls.  As for me, I
can flap only one wing, but I kiss you and I love you.

G. Sand



CLVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 19 March, 1870

I know, my friend, that you are very devoted to her. I know that she
[Footnote: Letter written about the rumour current, that George Sand
had meant to depict the Empress in one of the chief characters of
her novel, Malgre tout; the letter was sent by Flaubert to Madame
Cornu, god-child of Queen Hortense, and foster-sister of Napoleon
III.] is very kind to unfortunates who have been recommended to her;
that is all that I know of her private life. I have never had any
revelation nor document about her, NOT A WORD, NOT A DEED, which
would authorize me to depict her. So I have drawn only a figure of
fancy, I swear it, and those who pretended to recognize her in a
satire would be, in any case, bad servants and bad friends.

But I don't write satires: I am ignorant even of the meaning of the
word. I don't write PORTRAITS either; it is not my style. I invent.
The public, who does not know in what invention consists, thinks it
sees everywhere models. It is mistaken and it degrades art.

This is my SINCERE answer, I have only enough time to mail it.

G. Sand



CLVII. To MADAME HORTENSE CORNU

Your devotion was alarmed wrongly, dear madame, I was sure of it!
Here is the answer that came to me by return mail.

People in society, I reiterate, see allusions where there are none.
When I did Madame Bovary I was asked many times: "Is it Madame X.
whom you meant to depict?" and I received letters from perfectly
unknown people, among others one from a gentleman in Rheims who
congratulated me on HAVING AVENGED HIM! (against a faithless one).

Every pharmacist in Seine-Inferieure recognizing himself in Homais,
wanted to come to my house to box my ears. But the best (I
discovered it five years later) is that there was then in Africa the
wife of an army doctor named Madame Bovaries who was like Madame
Bovary, a name I had invented by altering that of Bouvaret.

The first sentence of our friend Maury in talking to me about
l'Education sentimentale was this: "Did you know X, an Italian, a
professor of mathematics? Your Senecal is his physical and moral
portrait! Everything is exact even to the cut of his hair!"

Others assert that I meant to depict in Arnoux, Bernard Latte (the
former editor), whom I have never seen, etc., etc.

All that is to tell you, dear madame, that the public is mistaken in
attributing to us intentions which we do not have.

I was very sure that Madame Sand had not intended to make any
portrait; (1) because of her loftiness of mind, her taste, her
reverence for art, and (2) because of her character, her feeling for
the conventions--and also FOR JUSTICE.
I even think, between ourselves, that this accusation has hurt her a
little. The papers roll us in the dirt every day without our ever
answering them, we whose business it is, however, to wield the pen,
and they think that in order to MAKE AN EFFECT, to be applauded, we
are going to attack such and such a one.

Oh! no! not so humble! our ambition is higher, and our courtesy
greater.--When one thinks highly of one's mind one does not choose
the necessary means to please the crowd. You understand me, don't
you?

But enough of this. I shall come to see you one of these days.
Looking forward to that with pleasure, dear madame, I kiss your
hands and am entirely yours,

Gustave Flaubert

Sunday evening.



CLVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
March, 1870

Dear master,

I have just sent your letter (for which I thank you) to Madame
Cornu, enclosing it in a letter from your troubadour, in which I
permitted myself to give bluntly my conception of things.

The two letters will be placed under the eyes of the LADY and will
teach her a little about aesthetics.

I saw l'Autre last evening, and I wept several times. It did me
good, really! How tender and exalting it is! What a charming work
and how they love the author! I missed you. I wanted to give you a
kiss like a little child. My oppressed heart is easier, thank you. I
think that it will get better! There were a lot of people there.
Berton and his son were recalled twice.



CLIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 3 April, 1870

Your old troubadour has passed through cruel anguish, Maurice has
been seriously, dangerously ill.[Footnote: With diptheria.] Favre,
MY OWN doctor, the only one in whom I have confidence, hastened to
us in time. After that Lolo had violent attacks of fever, other
terrors! At last our savior went off this morning leaving us almost
tranquil and our invalids went out to walk in the garden for the
first time.--But they still want a great deal of care and oversight,
and I shall not leave them for two or three weeks. If then you are
awaiting me in Paris, and the sun calls you elsewhere, have no
regret about it. I shall try to go to see you in Croisset from Paris
between the dawn and the dusk sometime.

At least tell me how you are, what you are doing, if you are on your
feet in every way.

My invalids and my well ones send you their affectionate regards,
and I kiss you as I love you; it is not little.

G. Sand

My friend Favre has quite a FANCY for you and wants to know you. He
is not a physician who seeks practice, he only practices for his
friends, and he is offended if they want to pay him. YOUR
PERSONALITY interests him, that is all, and I have promised to
present him to you, if you are willing. He is something more than a
physician, I don't know what exactly, A SEEKER--after what?--
EVERYTHING. He is amusing, original and interesting to the utmost
degree. You must tell me if you want to see him, otherwise I shall
manage for him not to think of it any more. Answer about this
matter.



CLX. TO GEORGE SAND
Monday morning, 11 o'clock

I felt that something unpleasant had happened to you, because I had
just written to you for news when your letter was brought to me this
morning. I fished mine back from the porter; here is a second one.

Poor dear master! How uneasy you must have been and Madame Maurice
also. You do not tell me what he had (Maurice). In a few days before
the end of the week, write to confirm to me that everything has
turned out well. The trouble lies, I think, with the abominable
winter from which we are emerging! One hears of nothing but
illnesses and funerals! My poor servant is still at the Dubois
hospital, and I am distressed when I go to see him. For two months
now he has been confined to his bed suffering horribly.

As for me, I am better. I have read prodigiously. I have overworked,
but now I am almost on my feet again. The mass of gloom that I have
in the depths of my heart is a little larger, that is all. But, in a
little while, I hope that it will not be noticed. I spend my days in
the library of the Institute. The Arsenal library lends me books
that I read in the evening, and I begin again the next day. I shall
return home to Croisset the first of May. But I shall see you before
then. Everything will get right again with the sun.

The lovely lady in question made to me, for you, the most proper
excuses, asserting to me that "she never had any intention  of
insulting genius."

Certainly, I shall be glad to meet M. Favre; since he is a friend of
yours I shall like him.



CLXI. TO GEORGE SAND
Tuesday morning

Dear master,

It is not staying in Paris that wears me out, but the series of
misfortunes that I have had during the last eight months! I am not
working too much, for what would become of me without  work?
However, it is very hard for me to be reasonable. I am overwhelmed
by a black melancholy, which returns a propos of everything and
nothing, many times a day. Then, it passes and it begins again.
Perhaps it is because it is too long since I have written anything.
Nervous reservoirs are exhausted. As soon as I am at Croisset, I
shall begin the article about my poor Bouilhet, a painful and sad
task which I am in a hurry to finish, so as to set to work at Saint-
Antoine. As that is an extravagant subject, I hope it will divert
me.

I have seen your physician, M. Favre, who seemed to me very strange
and a little mad, between ourselves. He ought to like me for I let
him talk all the time. There are high lights in his talk, things
which sparkle for a moment, then one sees not a ray.



CLXII. TO GEORGE SAND
Paris, Thursday

M. X.----sent me news of you on Saturday: so now I know that
everything is going well with you, and that you have no more
uneasiness, dear master. But you, personally, how are you? The two
weeks are almost up, and I do not see you coming.

My mood continues not to be sportive. I am still given up to
abominable readings, but it is time that I stopped for I am
beginning to be disgusted with my subject.

Are you reading Taine's powerful book? I have gobbled it down, the
first volume with infinite pleasure. In fifty years perhaps that
will be the philosophy that will be taught in the colleges.

And the preface to the Idees de M. Aubray?

How I long to see you and to jabber with you!



CLXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 16 April, 1870

What ought I to say to Levy so that he will take the first steps?
Tell me again how things are, for my memory is poor. You had sold
him one volume for ten thousand;--there are two, he himself told me
that that would be twenty thousand. What has he paid you up to now?
What words did you exchange at the time of this payment?

Answer, and I act.

Things are going better and better here, the little ones well again,
Maurice recovering nicely, I tired from having watched so much and
from watching yet, for he has to drink and wash out his mouth during
the night, and I am the only one in the house who has the faculty of
keeping awake. But I am not ill, and I work a little now and then
while loafing about. As soon as I can leave, I shall go to Paris. If
you are still there, it will be A PIECE OF GOOD LUCK, but I do not
dare to wish you to prolong your slavery there, for I can see that
you are still ill and that you are working too hard.

Croisset will cure you if you consent to take care of yourself.

I embrace you tenderly for myself and for all the family which
adores you.

G. Sand



CLXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 20 May, 1870

It is a very long time since I have had news of my old troubadour.
You must be in Croisset. If it is as warm there as it is here, you
must be suffering; here it is 34 degrees in the shade, and in the
night, 24. Maurice has had a bad relapse of sore throat, without
membranes this time, and without danger. But the inflammation was so
bad that for three days he could hardly swallow even a little water
and wine. Bouillon did not go down. At last this excessive heat has
cured him, it suits us all here, for Lina went to Paris this morning
vigorous and strong. Maurice gardens all day. The children are gay
and get prettier while you look at them. As for me, I am not
accomplishing anything; I have too much to do taking care of and
watching my boy, and now that the little mother is away, the little
children absorb me. I work, however, planning and dreaming. That
will be so much done when I can scribble.

I am still ON MY FEET, as Doctor Favre says. No old age yet, or
rather normal old age, the calmness ... OF VIRTUE, that thing that
people ridicule, and that I mention in mockery, but that corresponds
by an emphatic and silly word, to a condition of forced
inoffensiveness, without merit in consequence, but agreeable and
good to experience. It is a question of rendering it useful to art
when one believes in that, to the family and to friendship when one
cares for that; I don't dare to say how very simple and primitive I
am in this respect. It is the fashion to ridicule it, but let them.
I do not want to change.

There is my SPRING examination of my conscience, so as not to think
all summer about anything except what is not myself.

Come, you, your health first? And this sadness, this discontent that
Paris has left with you, is it forgotten? Are there no longer any
painful external circumstances? You have been too much shaken also.
Two of your dearest friends gone one after the other. There are
periods in life when destiny is ferocious to us. You are too young
to concentrate on the idea of REGAINING your affections in a better
world, or in this world made better. So you must, at your age (and
at mine I still try to), become more attached to what remains. You
wrote that to me when I lost Rollinat, my double in this life, the
veritable friend whose feeling for the differences between the sexes
had never hurt our pure affection, even when we were young. He was
my Bouilhet and more than that; for to my heart's intimacy was
joined a religious reverence for a real type of moral courage, which
had undergone all trials with a sublime SWEETNESS. I have OWED him
everything that is good in me, I am trying to keep it for love of
him. Is there not a heritage that our beloved dead leave us?

The despair that would make us abandon ourselves would be a treason
to them and an ingratitude. Tell me that you are calm and soothed,
that you are not working too much and that you are working well. I
am not without some anxiety because I have not had a letter from you
for a long time. I did not want to ask for one till I could tell you
that Maurice was quite well again; he embraces you, and the children
do not forget you. As for me, I love you.

G. Sand



CLXV. TO GEORGE SAND

No, dear master! I am not ill, but I have been busy with moving from
Paris and with getting settled in Croisset. Then my mother has been
very much indisposed. She is well now; then I have had to set in
order the rest of my poor Bouilhet's papers, on whom I have begun
the article. I wrote this week nearly six pages, which was very good
for me; this work is very painful in every way. The difficulty is in
knowing what not to say. I shall console myself a little in blurting
out two or three dogmatic opinions on the art of writing. It will be
an opportunity to express what I think; a sweet thing and one I am
always deprived of.

You say very lovely and also good things to me to restore my
courage. I have hardly any, but I am acting as if I had, which
perhaps comes to the same thing.

I feel no longer the need of writing, for I used to write especially
for one person alone, who is no more. That is the truth! And yet I
shall continue to write. But I have no more liking for it; the
fascination is gone. There are so few people who like what I like,
who are anxious about what I am interested in! Do you know in this
Paris, which is so large, one SINGLE house where they talk about
literature? And when it happens to be touched on incidentally, it is
always on its subordinate and external sides, such as the question
of success, of morality, of utility, of its timeliness, etc. It
seems to me that I am becoming a fossil, a being unrelated to the
surrounding world.

I would not ask anything better than to cast myself on some new
affection. But how? Almost all my old friends are married officials,
thinking of their little business the entire year, of the hunt
during vacation and of whist after dinner. I don't know one of them
who would be capable of passing an afternoon with me reading a poet.
They have their business; I, I have none. Observe that I am in the
same social position that I was at eighteen. My niece whom I love as
my daughter, does not live with me, and my poor good simple mother
has become so old that all conversation with her (except about her
health) is impossible. All that makes an existence which is not
diverting.

As for the ladies, "my little locality" furnishes none of them, and
then,--even so! I have nevver been able to put Venus an Apollo in
the same coop. It is one or the other, being a man of excess, a
gentleman entirely given over to what he does.

I repeat to myself the phrase of Goethe: "Go forward beyond the
tombs," and I hope to get used to the emptiness, but nothing more.

The more I know you, yourself, the more I admire you; how strong you
are!

Aside from a little Spinoza and Plutarch, I have read nothing since
my return, as I am quite occupied by my present work. It is a task
that will take me up to the end of July. I am in a hurry to be
through with it, so as to abandon myself to the extravagances of the
good Saint-Antoine, but I am afraid of not being SUFFICIENTLY IN THE
MOOD.

That is a charming story, Mademoiselle Hauterive, isn't it? This
suicide of lovers to escape misery ought to inspire fine moral
phrases from Prudhomme. As for me, I understand it. What they did is
not American, but how Latin and antique it is! They were not strong,
but perhaps very sensitive.



CLXVI. TO GEORGE SAND
Sunday, 26 June, 1870

You forget your troubadour who has just buried another friend! From
the seven that we used to be at the beginning of the dinners at
Magny's, we are only three now! I am gorged with coffins like an old
cemetery! I am having enough of them, frankly.

And in the midst of all that I keep on working! I finished
yesterday, such as it is, the article on my poor Bouilhet. I am
going to see if there is not some way of reviving one of his
comedies in prose. After that I shall set to work on Saint-Antoine.

And you, dear master, what is happening to you and all your family?
My niece is in the Pyrenees, and I am living alone with my mother,
who is becoming deafer and deafer, so that my existence lacks
diversion absolutely. I should like to go to sleep on a warm beach.
But for that I lack time and money. So I must push on my scratches
and grub as hard as possible.

I shall go to Paris at the beginning of August. Then I shall spend
all the month of October there for the rehearsals of Aisse. My
vacation will be confined to a week spent in Dieppe towards the end
of August. There are my plans.

It was distressing, the funeral of Jules Goncourt. Theo wept buckets
full.



CLXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 27 June, 1870

Another grief for you, my poor old friend. I too have a great one, I
mourn for Barbes, one of my religions, one of those beings who make
one reconciled with humanity. As for you, you miss poor Jules
[Footnote: De Goncourt.] and you pity the unhappy Edmond. You are
perhaps in Paris, so as to try to console him. I have just written
him, and I feel that you are struck again in your affections. What
an age! Every one is dying, everything is dying, and the earth is
dying also, eaten up by the sun and the wind. I don't know where I
get the courage to keep on living in the midst of these ruins. Let
us love each other to the end. You write me very little, I am
worried about you.

G. Sand



CLXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Saturday evening, 2 July, 1870

Dear good master,

Barbes' death has saddened me because of you. We, both of us, have
our mourning. What a succession of deaths during a year! I am as
dazed by them as if I had been hit on the head with a stick. What
troubles me (for we refer everything to ourselves), is the terrible
solitude in which I live. I have no longer anyone, I mean anyone
with whom to converse, "who is interested today in eloquence and
style."

Aside from you and Tourgueneff, I don't know a living being to whom
to pour out my soul about those things which I have most at heart;
and you live far away from me, both of you!

However, I continue to write. I have resolved to start at my Saint-
Antoine tomorrow or the day after. But to begin a protracted effort
I need a certain lightness which I lack just now. I hope, however,
that this extravagant work is going to get hold of me. Oh! how I
would like not to think any more of my poor Moi, of my miserable
carcass! It is getting on very well, my carcass. I sleep
tremendously! "The coffer is good," as the bourgeois say.

I have read lately some amazing theological things, which I have
intermingled with a little of Plutarch and Spinoza. I have nothing
more to say to you.

Poor Edmond de Goncourt is in Champagne at his relatives'. He has
promised to come here the end of this month. I don't think that the
hope of seeing his brother again in a better world consoles him for
having lost him in this one.

One juggles with empty words on this question of immortality, for
the question is to know if the moi persists. The affirmative seems
to me a presumption of our pride, a protest of our weakness against
the eternal order. Has death perhaps no more secrets to reveal to us
than life has?

What a year of evil! I feel as if I were lost in the desert, and I
assure you, dear master, that I am brave, however, and that I am
making prodigious efforts to be stoical. But my poor brain is
enfeebled at moments. I need only one thing (and that is not given
me), it is to have some kind of enthusiasm!

Your last letter but one was very sad. You also, heroic being, you
feel worn out! What then will become of us!

I have just reread the conversations between Goethe and Eckermann.
There was a man, that Goethe! But then he had everything on his
side, that man.



CLXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 29 June, 1870

Our letters are always crossing, and I have now the feeling that if
I write to you in the evening I shall receive a letter from you the
next morning; we could say to each other:

"You appeared to me in my sleep, looking a little sad."

What preoccupies me most about poor Jules' (de Goncourt) death, is
the survivor. I am sure that the dead are well off, that perhaps
they are resting before living again, and that in all cases they
fall back into the crucible so as to reappear with what good they
previously had and more besides. Barbes only suffered all his life.
There he is now, sleeping deeply. Soon he will awaken; but we, poor
beasts of survivors, we see them no longer. A little while before he
died, Duveyrier, who seemed to have recovered, said to me: "Which
one of us will go first?" We were exactly the same age. He
complained that those who went first could not let those who were
left know that they were happy, and that they remembered their
friends. I said, WHO KNOWS? Then we promised each other that the
first one to die should appear to the survivor, and should at least
try to speak to him.

He did not come, I have waited for him, he has said nothing to me.
He had one of the tenderest hearts, and a sincere good will. He was
not able to; it was not permitted, or perhaps, it was I; I did not
hear or understand.

It is, I say, this poor Edmond who is on my mind. That life lived
together, quite ended. I cannot think why the bond was broken,
unless he too believes that one does not really die.

I would indeed like to go to see you; apparently you have COOL
WEATHER in Croisset since you want to sleep ON A WARM BEACH. Come
here, you will not have a beach, but 36 degrees in the shade and a
stream cold as ice, is not to be despised. I go there to dabble in
it every day after my work; for I must work, Buloz advances me too
much money. Here I am DOING MY BUSINESS, as Aurore says, and not
being able to budge till autumn. I was too lazy after my fatigues as
sick-nurse. Little Buloz recently came to stir me up again. Now here
I am hard at it.

Since you are to be in Paris in August, you must come to spend
several days with us. You did laugh here anyhow; we will try to
distract you and to shake you up a bit. You will see the little
girls grown and prettier; the little one is beginning to talk.
Aurore chatters and argues. She calls Plauchut, OLD BACHELOR. And a
propos, accept the best regards of that fine and splendid boy along
with all the affectionate greetings of the family.

As for me, I embrace you tenderly and beg you to keep well.

G. Sand



CLXX. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Wednesday evening...1870

What has become of you, dear master, of you and yours? As for me, I
am disheartened, distressed by the folly of my compatriots. The
hopeless barbarism of humanity fills me with a black melancholy.
That enthusiasm which has no intelligent motive makes me want to
die, so as not to see it any longer.

The good Frenchman wants to fight: (1) because he thinks he is
provoked to it by Prussia; (2) because the natural condition of man
is savagery; (3) because war in itself contains a mystic element
which enraptures crowds.

Have we returned to the wars of races? I fear so. The terrible
butchery which is being prepared has not even a pretext. It is the
desire to fight for the sake of fighting.

I bewail the destroyed bridges, the staved-in tunnels, all this
human labor lost, in short a negation so radical.

The Congress of Peace is wrong at present. Civilization seems to me
far off. Hobbes was right: Homo homini lupus.

I have begun Saint-Antoine, and it would go perhaps rather well, if
I did not think of the war. And you?

The bourgeois here cannot contain himself. He thinks Prussia was too
insolent and wants to "avenge himself." Did you see that a gentleman
has proposed in the Chamber the pillage of the duchy of Baden! Ah!
why can't I live among the Bedouins!



CLXXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 26 July, 1870

I think this war is infamous; that authorized Marseillaise, a
sacrilege. Men are ferocious and conceited brutes; we are in the
HALF AS MUCH of Pascal; when will come the MORE THAN EVER!

It is between 40 and 45 degrees IN THE SHADE here. They are burning
the forests; another barbarous stupidity! The wolves come and walk
into our court, and we chase them away at night, Maurice with a
revolver and I with a lantern. The trees are losing their leaves and
perhaps their lives. Water for drinking is becoming scarce; the
harvests are almost nothing; but we have war, what luck!

Farming is going to nought, famine threatens, poverty is lurking
about while waiting to transform itself into Jacquerie; but we shall
fight with the Prussians. Malbrough s'en va-t-en guerre!

You said rightly that in order to work, a certain lightness was
needed; where is it to be found in these accursed times?

Happily, we have no one ill at our house. When I see Maurice and
Lina acting, Aurore and Gabrielle playing, I do not dare to complain
for fear of losing all.

I love you, my dear old friend, we all love you.

Your troubadour,

G. Sand



CLXXII. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Wednesday, 3 August, 1870

What! dear master, you too are demoralized, sad? What will become of
the weak souls?

As for me, my heart is oppressed in a way that astonishes me, and I
wallow in a bottomless melancholy, in spite of work, in spite of the
good Saint-Antoine who ought to distract me. Is it the consequence
of my repeated afflictions? Perhaps. But the war is a good deal
responsible for it. I think that we are getting into the dark.

Behold then, the NATURAL MAN. Make theories now! Boast the progress,
the enlightenment and the good sense of the masses, and the
gentleness of the French people! I assure you that anyone here who
ventured to preach peace would get himself murdered. Whatever
happens, we have been set back for a long time to come.

Are the wars between races perhaps going to begin again? One will
see, before a century passes, several millions of men kill one
another in one engagement. All the East against all Europe, the old
world against the new! Why not? Great united works like the Suez
Canal are, perhaps, under another form, outlines and preparations
for these monstrous conflicts of which we have no idea.

Is Prussia perhaps going to have a great drubbing which entered into
the schemes of Providence for reestablishing European equilibrium?
That country was tending to be hypertrophied like France under Louis
XIV and Napoleon. The other organs are inconvenienced by it. Thence
universal trouble. Would formidable bleedings be useful?

Ah! we intellectuals! Humanity is far from our ideal! and our
immense error, our fatal error, is to think it like us and to want
to treat it accordingly.

The reverence, the fetichism, that they have for universal suffrage
revolts me more than the infallibility of the pope (which has just
delightfully missed its point, by the way). Do you think that if
France, instead of being governed on the whole by the crowd, were in
the power of the mandarins, we should be where we are now? If,
instead of having wished to enlighten the lower classes, we had
busied ourselves with instructing the higher, we should not have
seen M. de Keratry proposing the pillage of the duchy of Baden, a
measure that the public finds very proper!

Are you studying Prudhomme now? He is gigantic! He admires Musset's
Rhin, and asks if Musset has done anything else. Here you have
Musset accepted as the national poet and ousting Beranger! What
immense buffoonery is...everything! But a not at all gay buffoonery.

Misery is very evident. Everyone is in want, beginning with myself!
But perhaps we were too accustomed to comfort and tranquillity. We
buried ourselves in material things. We must return to the great
tradition, hold no longer to life, to happiness, to money nor to
anything; be what our grandfathers were, light, effervescing people.

Once men passed their life in starving. The same prospect is on the
horizon. What you tell me about poor Nohant is terrible. The country
has suffered less here than with you.



CLXXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset.
Nohant, 8 August, 1870

Are you in Paris in the midst of all this torment? What a lesson the
people are getting who want absolute masters! France and Prussia are
cutting each other's throats for reasons that they don't understand!
Here we are in the midst of great disasters, and what tears at the
end of it all, even should we be the victors! One sees nothing but
poor peasants mourning for their children who are leaving.

The mobilization takes away those who were left with us and how they
are being treated to begin with! What disorder, what disarray in
that military administration, which absorbed everything and had to
swallow up everything! Is this horrible experience going to prove to
the world that warfare ought to be suppressed or that civilization
has to perish?

We have reached the point this evening of knowing that we are
beaten. Perhaps tomorrow we shall know that we have beaten, and what
will there be good or useful from one or the other?

It has rained here at last, a horrible storm which destroyed
everything.

The peasant is working and ploughing his fields; digging hard
always, sad or gay. He is imbecile, people say; no, he is a child in
prosperity, a man in disaster, more of a man than we who complain;
he says nothing, and while people are killing, he is sowing,
repairing continually on one side what they are destroying from the
other. We are going to try to do as he, and to hunt a bubbling
spring fifty or a hundred yards below ground. The engineer is here,
and Maurice is explaining to him the geology of the soil.

We are trying to dig into the bowels of the earth to forget all that
is going on above it. But we cannot distract ourselves from this
terror!

Write me where you are; I am sending this to you on the day agreed
upon to rue Murillo. We love you, and we all embrace you.

G. Sand

Nohant, Sunday evening.



CLXXIV. TO GEORGE SAND.
Croisset, Wednesday, 1870

I got to Paris on Monday, and I left it again on Wednesday. Now I
know the Parisian to the very bottom, and I have excused in my heart
those most ferocious politics of 1793. Now, I understand them! What
imbecility! what ignorance! what presumption! My compatriots make me
want to vomit. They are fit to be put in the same sack with Isidore!

This people deserves to be chastised, and I fear that it will be.

It is impossible for me to read anything whatever, still more so to
write anything. I spend my time like everyone else in waiting for
news. Ah! if I did not have my mother, I would already be gone!



CLXXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset.
Nohant, 15 August, 1870

I wrote to you to Paris according to your instructions the 8th.
Weren't you there then? Probably so: in the midst of all this
confusion, to publish Bouilhet, a poet! this is not the moment. As
for me, my courage is weak. There is always a woman under the skin
of the old troubadour. This human butchery tears my poor heart to
pieces. I tremble too for all my children and friends, who perhaps
are to be hacked to pieces.

And YET, in the midst of all that, my soul exults and has ecstasies
of faith; these terrific lessons which are necessary for us to
understand our imbecility, must be of use to us. We are perhaps
making our last return to the ways of the old world. There are sharp
and clear principles for everyone today that ought to extricate them
from this torment. Nothing is useless in the material order of the
universe. The moral order cannot escape the law. Bad engenders good.
I tell you that we are in the HALF AS MUCH of Pascal, so as to get
TO THE MORE THAN EVER! That is all the mathematics that I
understand.

I have finished a novel in the midst of this torment, hurrying up so
as not to be worn out before the end. I am as tired as if I had
fought with our poor soldiers.

I embrace you. Tell me where you are, what you are thinking.

We all love you.

What a fine St. Napoleon we have!

G. Sand



CLXXVI. TO GEORGE SAND.
Saturday, 1870

Dear master,

Here we are in the depths of the abyss! A shameful peace will
perhaps not be accepted! The Prussians intend to destroy Paris! That
is their dream.

I don't think the siege of Paris is very imminent. But in order to
force Paris to yield, they are going to (1) terrify her by the sight
of cannon, and (2) ravage the surrounding country.

We expect the visit of these gentlemen at Rouen, and as I have been
(since Sunday) lieutenant of my company, I drill my men and I am
going to Rouen to take lessons in military tactics.

The most deplorable thing is that opinions are divided, some for
defence to the utmost, and others for peace at any price.

I AM DYING OF HUMILIATION. What a house mine is! Fourteen persons
who sigh and unnerve me! I curse women! It is because of them that
we perish.

I expect that Paris will have the fate of Warsaw, and you distress
me, you with your enthusiasm for the Republic. At the moment when we
are overcome by the plainest positivism, how can you still believe
in phantoms? Whatever happens, the people who are now in power will
be sacrificed, and the Republic will follow their fate. Observe that
I defend that poor Republic; but I do not believe in it.

That is all that I have to say to you. Now I should have many more
things to say, but my head is not clear. It is as if cataracts,
floods, oceans of sadness, were breaking over me. It is not possible
to suffer more. Sometimes I am afraid of going mad. The face of my
mother, when I turn my eyes toward her, takes away all my strength.

This is where our passion for not wanting to see the truth has taken
us! Love of pretence and of flap-doodle. We are going to become a
Poland, then a Spain. Then it will be the turn of Prussia who will
be devoured by Russia.

As for me, I consider myself a man whose career is ended. My brain
is not going to recover. One can write no longer when one does not
think well of oneself. I demand only one thing, that is to die, so
to be at rest.



CLXXVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Sunday evening

I am still alive, dear master, but I am hardly any better, for I am
so sad! I didn't write you any sooner, for I was waiting, for news
from you. I didn't know where you were.

Here it is six weeks that we have been expecting the coming of the
Prussians from day to day. We strain our ears, thinking we can hear
the sound of the cannon from a distance. They are surrounding Seine-
Inferieure in a radius of from fourteen to twenty leagues. They are
even nearer, since they are occupying Vexin, which they have
completely destroyed. What horrors! It makes one blush for being a
man!

If we have had a success on the Loire, their appearance will be
delayed. But shall we have it? When the hope comes to me, I try to
repel it, and yet, in the very depths of myself, in spite of all, I
cannot keep myself from hoping a little, a very little bit.

I don't think that there is in all France a sadder man than I am!
(It all depends on the sensitiveness of people.) I am dying of
grief. That is the truth, and consolations irritate me. What
distresses me is: (1) the ferocity of men; (2) the conviction that
we are going to enter upon a stupid era. People will be utilitarian,
military, American and Catholic! Very Catholic! You will see! The
Prussian War ends the French Revolution and destroys it.

But supposing we were conquerors? you will say to me. That
hypothesis is contrary to all historical precedents. Where did you
ever see the south conquer the north, and the Catholics dominate the
Protestants? The Latin race is agonizing. France is going to follow
Spain and Italy, and boorishness (pignouflism) begins!

What a cataclysm! What a collapse! What misery! What abominations!
Can one believe in progress and in civilization in the face of all
that is going on? What use, pray, is science, since this people
abounding in scholars commits abominations worthy of the Huns and
worse than theirs, because they are systematic, cold-blooded,
voluntary, and have for an excuse, neither passion nor hunger?

Why do they abhor us so fiercely? Don't you feel overwhelmed by the
hatred of forty millions of men? This immense infernal chasm makes
me giddy.

Ready-made phrases are not wanting: France will rise again! One must
not despair! It is a salutary punishment! We were really too
immoral! etc. Oh! eternal poppycock! No! one does not recover from
such a blow! As for me, I feel myself struck to my very marrow!

If I were twenty years younger, I should perhaps not think all that,
and if I were twenty years older I should be resigned.

Poor Paris! I think it is heroic. But if we do find it again, it
will not be our Paris any more! All the friends that I had there are
dead or have disappeared. I have no longer any center. Literature
seems to me to be a vain and useless thing! Shall I ever be in a
condition to write again?

Oh! if I could flee into a country where one does not see uniforms,
where one does not hear the drum, where one does not talk of
massacres, where one is not obliged to be a citizen! But the earth
is no longer habitable for the poor mandarins.



CLXXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday

I am sad no longer. I took up my Saint-Antoine yesterday. So much
the worse, one has to get accustomed to it! One must accustom
oneself to what is the natural condition of man, that is to say, to
evil.

The Greeks at the time of Pericles made art without knowing if they
should have anything to eat the next day. Let us be Greeks. I shall
confess to you, however, dear master, that I feel rather a savage.
The blood of my ancesters, the Natchez or the Hurons, boils in my
educated veins, and I seriously, like a beast, like an animal, want
to fight!

Explain that to me! The idea of making peace now exasperates me, and
I would rather that Paris were burned (like Moscow), than see the
Prussians enter it. But we have not gotten to that; I think the wind
is turning.

I have read some soldiers' letters, which are models. One can't
swallow up a country where people write like that. France is a
resourceful jade, and will be up again.

Whatever happens, another world is going to begin, and I feel that I
am very old to adapt myself to new customs.

Oh! how I miss you, how I want to see you!

We have decided here to all march on Paris if the compatriots of
Hegel lay siege to it. Try to get your Berrichons to buck up. Call
to them: "Come to help me prevent the enemy from drinking and eating
in a country which is foreign to them!"

The war (I hope) will make a home thrust at the "authorities."

The individual, disowned, overwhelmed by the modern world, will he
regain his importance? Let us hope so!



CLXXIX. TO GEORGE SAND.
Tuesday, 11 October, 1870

Dear master,

Are you still living? Where are you, Maurice, and the others?

I don't know how it is that I am not dead, I have suffered so
atrociously for six weeks.

My mother has fled to Rouen. My niece is in London. My brother is
busy with town affairs, and, as for me, I am alone here, eaten up
with impatience and chagrin! I assure you that I have wanted to do
right; what misery! I have had at my door today two hundred and
seventy-one poor people, and they were all given something. What
will this winter be?

The Prussians are now twelve hours from Rouen, and we have no
commands, no orders, no discipline, nothing, nothing! They hold out
false hopes to us continually with the army of the Loire. Where is
it? Do you know anything about it? What are they doing in the middle
of France? Paris will end by being starved, and no one is taking her
any aid!

The imbecilities of the Republic surpass those of the Empire. Are
they playing under all this some abominable comedy? Why such
inaction?

Ah! how sad I am. I feel that the world is going by.



CLXXX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset.
Le Chatre, 14 October, 1870

We are living at Le Chatre. Nohant is ravaged by smallpox with
complications, horrible. We had to take our little ones into the
Creuse, to friends who came to get us, and we spent three weeks
there, looking in vain for quarters where a family could stay for
three months. We were asked to go south and were offered
hospitality; but we did not want to leave the country where, from
one day to another, one can be useful, although one hardly knows yet
in what way to go at it.

So we have come back to the friends who lived the nearest to our
abandoned hearth; and we are awaiting events. To speak of all the
peril and trouble there is in establishing the Republic in the
interior of our provinces would be quite useless. There can be no
illusion: everything is at stake, and the end will perhaps be
ORLEANISM. But we are pushed into the unforeseen to such an extent
that it seems to me puerile to have anticipations; the thing to do
is to escape the next catastrophe.

Don't let's say that it is impossible; don't let's think it. Don't
let's despair about France. She is going through expiation for her
madness, she will be reborn no matter what happens. We shall perhaps
be carried away, the rest of us. To die of pneumonia or of a bullet
is dying just the same. Let's die without cursing our race!

We still love you, and we all embrace you.

G. Sand



CLXXXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset.
Nohant, 4 February, 1871.

Don't you receive my letters, then? Write to me I beg you, one word
only: I AM WELL. We are so worried!

They are all well in Paris.

We embrace you.

G. Sand



CLXXXII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT.
Nohant, 22 February, 1871

I received your letter of the 15th this morning; what a cruel thorn
it takes from my heart! One gets frantic with anxiety now when one
does not receive answers. Let us hope that we can talk soon and tell
all about our ABSENCE from each other. I too have had the good
fortune not to lose any of my friends, young or old. That is all the
good one can say. I do not regret this Republic, it has been the
greatest failure of all! the most unfortunate for Paris, the most
unsuitable in the provinces. Besides, if I had loved it, I should
not regret anything; if only this odious war might end! We love you
and we embrace you affectionately. I shall not hurry to go to Paris.
It will be pestilential for some time to come.

Yours.



CLXXXIII. TO GEORGE SAND.
Dieppe, 11 March, 1871

When shall we meet? Paris does not seem amusing to me. Ah! into what
sort of a world are we going to enter! Paganism, Christianity,
idiotism, there are the three great evolutions of humanity! It is
sad to find ourselves at the beginning of the third.

I shall not tell you all I have suffered since September. Why didn't
I die from it? That is what surprises me! No one was more desperate
than I was. Why? I have had bad moments in my life, I have gone
through great losses. I have wept a great deal. I have undergone
much anguish. Well! all these pangs accumulated together, are
nothing in comparison to that. And I cannot get over them! I am not
consoled! I have no hope!

Yet I did not see myself as a progressivist and a humanitarian. That
doesn't matter. I had some illusions! What barbarity! What a slump!
I am wrathful at my contemporaries for having given me the feelings
of a brute of the twelfth century! I'M STIFLING IN GALL! These
officers who break mirrors with white gloves on, who know Sanskrit
and who fling themselves on the champagne, who steal your watch and
then send you their visiting card, this war for money, these
civilized savages give me more horror than cannibals. And all the
world is going to imitate them, is going to be a soldier! Russia has
now four millions of them. All Europe will wear a uniform. If we
take our revenge, it will be ultra-ferocious, and observe that one
is going to think only of that, of avenging oneself on Germany! The
government, whatever it is, can support itself only by speculating
on that passion. Wholesale murder is going to be the end of all our
efforts, the ideal of France!

I cherish the following dream: of going to live in the sun in a
tranquil country!

Let us look for new hypocrisies: declamations on virtue, diatribes
on corruption, austerity of habits, etc. Last degree of pedantry!

I have now at Croisset twelve Prussians. As soon as my poor dwelling
(of which I have a horror now) is emptied and cleaned, I shall
return there; then I shall go doubtless to Paris, despite its
unhealthfulness! But I don't care a hang for that.



CLXXXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset.
Nohant, 17 March, 1871

I received your letter of the 11th yesterday.

We have all suffered in spirit more than at any other time of our
lives, and we shall always suffer from that wound. It is evident
that the savage instinct tends to take the upper hand; but I fear
something worse; it is the egoistic and cowardly instinct; it is the
ignoble corruption of false patriots, of ultra-republicans who cry
out for vengeance, and who hide themselves; a good pretext for the
bourgeois who want a STRONG reaction. I fear lest we shall not even
be vindictive,--all that bragging, coupled with poltroonery, will so
disgust us and so impel us to live from day to day as under the
Restoration, submitting to everything and only asking to be let
alone.

There will be an awakening later. I shall not be here then, and you,
you will be old! Go to live in the sun in a tranquil country! Where?
What country is going to be tranquil in this struggle of barbarity
against civilization, a struggle which is going to be universal? Is
not the sun itself a myth? Either he hides himself or he burns you
up, and it is thus with everything on this unhappy planet. Let us
love it just the same, and accustom ourselves to suffering on it.

I have written day by day my impressions and my reflections during
the crisis. The Revue des Deux Mondes is publishing this diary. If
you read it, you will see that everywhere life has been torn from
its very foundations, even in the country where the war has not
penetrated.

You will see too, that I have not swallowed, although very greedy,
party humbugs. But I don't know if you are of my opinion, that full
and entire liberty would save us from these disasters and restore us
to the path of possible progress again. The abuses of liberty give
me no anxiety of themselves; but those whom they frighten always
incline towards the abuse of power. Just now M. Thiers seems to
understand it; but can he and will he know how to preserve the
principle by which he has become the arbiter of this great problem?

Whatever happens, let us love each other, and do not keep me in
ignorance of what concerns you. My heart is full to bursting and the
remembrance of you eases it a little from its perpetual disquiet. I
am afraid lest these barbarous guests devastate Croisset; for they
continue in spite of peace to make themselves odious and disgusting
everywhere. Ah! how I should like to have five billions in order to
chase them away! I should not ask to get them back again.

Now, do come to us, we are so quiet here; materially, we have been
so always. We force ourselves to take up our work again, we resign
ourselves; what is there better to do? You are beloved here, we live
here in a continual state of loving one another; we are holding on
to our Lamberts, whom we shall keep as long as possible. All our
children have come out of the war safe and sound. You would live
here in peace and be able to work; for that must be, whether one is
in the mood or not! The season is going to be lovely. Paris will
calm itself during that time. You are looking for a peaceful spot.
It is under your nose, with hearts which love you!

I embrace you a thousand times for myself and for all my brood. The
little girls are splendid. The Lamberts' little boy is charming.



CLXXXV. TO GEORGE SAND.
Neuville near Dieppe, Friday, 31 March, 1871

Dear master,

Tomorrow, at last, I resign myself to re-enter Croisset! It is hard!
But I must! I am going to try to make up again my poor Saint-Antoine
and to forget France.

My mother stays here with her grandchild, till one knows where to go
without fear of the Prussians or of a riot.

Some days ago I went from here with Dumas to Brussels from where I
thought to go direct to Paris. But "the new Athens" seems to me to
surpass Dahomey in ferocity and imbecility. Has the end come to the
HUMBUGS? Will they have finished with hollow metaphysics and
conventional ideas? All the evil comes from our gigantic ignorance.
What ought to be studied is believed without discussion. Instead of
investigating, people make assertions.

The French Revolution must cease to be a dogma, and it must become
once more a part of science, like the rest of human things. If
people had known more, they would not have believed that a mystical
formula is capable of making armies, and that the word "Republic" is
enough to conquer a million of well disciplined men. They would have
left Badinguet on the throne EXPRESSLY to make peace, ready to put
him in the galleys afterward. If they had known more, they would
have known what the volunteers of '92 were and the retreat of
Brunswick gained by bribery through Danton and Westermann. But no!
always the same old story! always poppycock! There is now the
Commune of Paris which is returning to the real Middle Ages! That's
flat! The question of leases especially, is splendid! The government
interferes in natural rights now, it intervenes in contracts between
individuals. The Commune asserts that we do not owe what we owe, and
that one service is not paid for by another. It is an enormity of
absurdity and injustice.

Many conservatives who, from love of order, wanted to preserve the
Republic, are going to regret Badinguet and in their hearts recall
the Prussians. The people of the Hotel de Ville have changed the
object of our hatred. That is why I am angry with them. It seems to
me that we have never been lower.

We oscillate between the society of Saint-Vincent de Paul and the
International. But this latter commits too many imbecilities to have
a long life. I admit that it may overcome the troops at Versailles
and overturn the government, the Prussians will enter Paris, and
"order will reign" at Warsaw. If, on the contrary, it is conquered,
the reaction will be furious and all liberty will be strangled.

What can one say of the socialists who imitate the proceedings of
Badinguet and of William: requisitions, suppressions of newspapers,
executions without trial, etc.? Ah! what an immoral beast is the
crowd! and how humiliating it is to be a man!

I embrace you!



CLXXXVI. TO GEORGE SAND.
Croisset, Monday evening, two o'clock.

Dear master,

Why no letters? Haven't you received mine sent from Dieppe? Are you
ill? Are you still alive? What does it mean? I hope very much that
neither you (nor any of yours) are in Paris, capital of arts,
cornerstone of civilization, center of fine manners and of urbanity?

Do you know the worst of all that? IT IS THAT WE GET ACCUSTOMED TO
IT. Yes! one does. One becomes accustomed to getting along without
Paris, to worrying about it no longer, and almost to thinking that
it exists no longer.

As for me, I am not like the bourgeois; I consider that after the
invasion there are no more misfortunes. The war with Prussia gave me
the effect of a great upheaval of nature, one of those cataclysms
that happen every six thousand years; while the insurrection in
Paris is, to my eyes, a very clear and almost simple thing.

What retrogressions! What savages! How they resemble the people of
the League and the men in armor! Poor France, who will never free
herself from the Middle Ages! who labors along in the Gothic idea of
the Commune, which is nothing else than the Roman municipality. Oh!
I assure you that my heart is heavy over it!

And the little reaction that we are going to have after that? How
the good ecclesiastics are going to flourish again!

I have started at Saint-Antoine once more, and I am working
tremendously.



CLXXXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset.
Nohant, 28 April, 1871

No, certainly I do not forget you! I am sad, sad, that is to say,
that I am stunned, that I watch the spring, that I am busy, that I
talk as if there were nothing; but I have not been able to be alone
an instant since that horrible occurrence without falling into a
bitter despair. I make great efforts to prevent it; I do not want to
be discouraged; I do not want to deny the past and dread the future;
but it is my will, it is my reason that struggles against a profound
impression unsurmountable up to the present moment.

That is why I did not want to write to you before feeling better,
not that I am ashamed to have crises of depression, but because I
did not want to increase your sadness already so profound, by adding
the weight of mine to it. For me, the ignoble experiment that Paris
is attempting or is undergoing, proves nothing against the laws of
the eternal progression of men and things, and, if I have gained any
principles in my mind, good or bad, they are neither shattered nor
changed by it. For a long time I have accepted patience as one
accepts the sort of weather there is, the length of winter, old age,
lack of success in all its forms. But I think that partisans
(sincere) ought to change their formulas or find out perhaps the
emptiness of every a priori formula.

It is not that which makes me sad. When a tree is dead, one should
plant two others. My unhappiness comes from pure weakness of heart
that I don't know how to overcome. I cannot sleep over the suffering
and even over the ignominy of others. I pity those who do the evil!
while I recognize that they are not at all interesting, their moral
state distresses me. One pities a little bird that has fallen from
its nest; why not pity a heap of consciences fallen in the mud? One
suffered less during the Prussian siege. One loved Paris unhappy in
spite of itself, one pities it so much the more now that one can no
longer love it. Those who never loved get satisfaction by mortally
hating it. What shall we answer? Perhaps we should not answer at
all. The scorn of France is perhaps the necessary punishment of the
remarkable cowardice with which the Parisians have submitted to the
riot and its adventurers. It is a consequence of the acceptance of
the adventurers of the Empire; other felons but the same cowardice.

But I did not want to talk to you of that, you ROAR about it enough
as it is! one ought to be distracted; for if one thinks too much
about it, one becomes separated from one's own limbs and lets
oneself undergo amputation with too much stoicism.

You don't tell me in what state you found your charming nest at
Croisset. The Prussians occupied it; did they ruin it, dirty it, rob
it? Your books, your bibelots, did you find them all? Did they
respect your name, your workshop? If you can work again there, peace
will come to your spirit. As for me, I am waiting till mine gets
well, and I know that I shall have to help myself to my own cure by
a certain faith often shaken, but of which I make a duty.

Tell me whether the tulip tree froze this winter, and if the poppies
are pretty.

I often take the journey in spirit; I see again your garden and its
surroundings. How far away that is! How many things have happened
since! One hardly knows whether one is a hundred years old or not!

My little girls bring me back to the notion of time; they are
growing, they are amusing and affectionate; it is through them and
the two beings who gave them to me that I feel myself still of the
world; it is through you too, dear friend, whose kind and loving
heart I always feel to be good and alive. How I should like to see
you! But I have no longer a way of going and coming.

We embrace you, all of us, and we love you.

G. Sand



CLXXXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND

I am answering at once your questions that concern me personally.
No! the Prussians did not loot my house. They HOOKED some little
things of no importance, a dressing case, a bandbox, some pipes; but
on the whole they did no harm. As for my study, it was respected. I
had buried a large box full of letters and hidden my voluminous
notes on Saint-Antoine. I found all that intact.

The worst of the invasion for me is that it has aged my poor, dear,
old mother by ten years! What a change! She can no longer walk
alone, and is distressingly weak! How sad it is to see those whom
one loves deteriorate little by little!

In order to think no longer on the public miseries or on my own, I
have plunged again with fury into Saint-Antoine, and if nothing
disturbs me and I continue at this pace, I shall have finished it
next winter. I am very eager to read to you the sixty pages which
are done. When we can circulate about again on the railroad, do come
to see me for a little while. Your old troubadour has waited for you
for such a long time! Your letter of this morning has saddened me.
What a proud fellow you are and what immense courage you have!

I am not like a lot of people whom I hear bemoaning the war of
Paris. For my part, I find it more tolerable than the invasion,
there is no more despair possible, and that is what proves once more
our abasement. "Ah! God be thanked, the Prussians are there!" is the
universal cry of the bourgeois. I put messieurs the workmen into the
same pack, and would have them all thrust together into the river!
Moreover they are on the way there, and then calm will return. We
are going to become a great, flat industrial country like Belgium.
The disappearance of Paris (as center of the government) will render
France colorless and dull. She will no longer have a heart, a
center, nor, I think, a spirit.

As for the Commune, which is about to die out, it is the last
manifestation of the Middle Ages. The very last, let us hope!

I hate democracy (at least the kind that is understood in France),
that is to say, the exaltation of mercy to the detriment of justice,
the negation of right, in a word, antisociability.

The Commune rehabilitates murderers, quite as Jesus pardoned
thieves, and they pillage the residences of the rich, because they
have been taught to curse Lazarus, who was not a bad rich man, but
simply a rich man. "The Republic is above every criticism" is
equivalent to that belief: "The pope is infallible!" Always
formulas! Always gods!

The god before the last, which was universal suffrage, has just
shown his adherents a terrible farce by nominating "the murderers of
Versailles." What shall we believe in, then? In nothing! That is the
beginning of wisdom. It was time to have done with "principles" and
to take up science, and investigation. The only reasonable thing (I
always come back to that) is a government by mandarins, provided the
mandarins know something and even that they know many things. The
people is an eternal infant, and it will be (in the hierarchy of
social elements) always in the last row, since it is number, mass,
the unlimited. It is of little matter whether many peasants know how
to read and listen no longer to their cure, but it is of great
matter that many men like Renan or Littre should be able to live and
be listened to! Our safety is now only in a LEGITIMATE ARISTOCRACY,
I mean by that, a majority that is composed of more than mere
numbers.

If they had been more enlightened, if there had been in Paris more
people acquainted with history, we should not have had to endure
Gambetta, nor Prussia, nor the Commune. What did the Catholics do to
meet a great danger? They crossed themselves while consigning
themselves to God and to the saints. We, however, who are advanced,
we are going to cry out, "Long live the Republic!" while recalling
what happened in '92; and there was no doubt of its success, observe
that. The Prussian existed no longer, they embraced one another with
joy and restrained themselves from running to the defiles of the
Argonne where there are defiles no longer; never mind, that is
according to tradition. I have a friend in Rouen who proposed to a
club the manufacture of lances to fight against the breech-loaders!

Ah! it would have been more practical to keep Badinguet, in order to
send him to the galleys once peace was made! Austria did not have a
revolution after Sadowa, nor Italy after Novara, nor Russia after
Sebastopol! But the good French hasten to demolish their house as
soon as the chimney has caught fire.

Well, I must tell you an atrocious idea; I am AFRAID that the
destruction of the Vendome column is sowing the seeds of a third
Empire! Who knows if in twenty or in forty years, a grandson of
Jerome will not be our master?

For the moment Paris is completely epileptic. A result of the
congestion caused by the siege. France, on the whole, has lived for
several years in an extraordinary mental state. The success of la
Lanterne and Troppman have been very evident symptoms of it. That
folly is the result of too great imbecility, and that imbecility
comes from too much bluffing, for because of lying they had become
idiotic. They had lost all notion of right and wrong, of beautiful
and ugly. Recall the criticism of recent years. What difference did
it make between the sublime and the ridiculous? What lack of
respect; what ignorance! what a mess! "Boiled or roasted, same
thing!" and at the same time, what servility for the opinion of the
day, the dish of the fashion!

All was false! False realism, false army, false credit, and even
false harlots. They were called "marquises," while the great ladies
called themselves familiarly "cochonnettes." Those girls who were of
the tradition of Sophie Arnould, like Lagier, roused horror. You
have not seen the reverence of Saint-Victor for la Paiva. And this
falseness (which is perhaps a consequence of romanticism,
predominance of passion over form, and of inspiration over rule) was
applied especially in the manner of judging. They extolled an
actress not as an actress, but as a good mother of a family! They
asked art to be moral, philosophy to be clear, vice to be decent,
and science to be within the range of the people.

But this is a very long letter. When I start abusing my
contemporaries, I never get through with it.



CLXXXIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Sunday evening, 10 June, 1871

Dear master,

I never had a greater desire or a greater need to see you than now.
I have just come from Paris and I don't know to whom to talk. I am
choking. I am overcome, or rather, absolutely disheartened.

The odor of corpses disgusts me less than the miasmas of egotism
that exhale from every mouth. The sight of the ruins is as nothing
in comparison with the great Parisian inanity. With a very few
exceptions it seemed to me that everybody ought to be tied up.

Half the population wants to strangle the other half, and VICE
VERSA. This is clearly to be seen in the eyes of the passers-by.

And the Prussians exist no longer! People excuse them and admire
them. The "reasonable people" want to be naturalized Germans. I
assure you it is enough to make one despair of the human race.

I was in Versailles on Thursday. The excesses of the Right inspire
fear. The vote about the Orleans is a concession made to it, so as
not to irritate it, and so as to have the time to prepare against
it.

I except from the general folly, Renan who, on the contrary, seemed
to me very philosophical, and the good Soulie who charged me to give
you a thousand affectionate messages.

I have collected a mass of horrible and unpublished details which I
spare you.

My little trip to Paris has troubled me extremely, and I am going to
have a hard time in getting down to work again.  What do you think
of my friend Maury, who kept the tricolor over the Archives all
during the Commune? I think few men are capable of such pluck.

When history clears up the burning of Paris, it will find several
elements among which are, without any doubt: (1) the Prussians, and
(2) the people of Badinguet; they have NO LONGER ANY written proof
against the Empire, and Haussman is going to present himself boldly
to the elections of Paris.

Have you read, among the documents found in the Tuileries last
September, a plot of a novel by Isidore? What a scenario!



CXC. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Paris
[FOOTNOTE: Evidently an answer to a lost letter.] Nohant, 23 July,
1871

No, I am not ill, my dear old troubadour, in spite of the sorrow
which is the daily bread of France; I have an iron constitution and
an exceptional old age, abnormal even, for my strength increases at
the age when it ought to diminish. The day that I resolutely buried
my youth, I grew twenty years younger. You will tell me that the
bark undergoes none the less the ravages of time. I don't care for
that, the heart of the tree is very good and the sap still runs as
in the old apple trees in my garden, which bear fruit all the better
the more gnarly they are. Thank you for having worried over the
illness which the papers have bestowed upon me. Maurice thanks you
also and embraces you. He is still mingling with his scientific,
literary, and agricultural studies, beautiful marionette shows. He
thinks of you every time and says that he would like to have you
here to note his progress, for he continually improves.

In what condition are we, according to your opinion?

In Rouen, you no longer have any Prussians at your back, that's
something, and one would say that the bourgeois Republic wants to
impose itself. It will be foolish. You foretold that, and I don't
doubt it; but after the inevitable rule of the Philistines, life
will extend and spread on all sides. The filth of the Commune shows
us dangers which were not sufficiently foreseen and which enforce a
new political life on everybody, carrying on one's affairs oneself
and forcing the charming proletariat created by the Empire to know
what is possible and what is not. Education does not teach honesty
and disinterestedness overnight. The vote is immediate education.
They have appointed Raoul Rigault and company. They know how much
people like that cost now by the yard; let them go on and they will
die of hunger. There is no other way to make them understand in a
short time.

Are you working? Is Saint-Antoine going well? Tell me what you are
doing in Paris, what you are seeing, what you are thinking. I have
not the courage to go there. Do come to see me before you return to
Croisset. I am blue from not seeing you, it is a sort of death.

G. Sand



CXCI. TO GEORGE SAND
25 July, 1871

I find Paris a little less mad than in June, at least on the
surface. They are beginning to hate Prussia in a natural manner,
that is to say, they are getting back into French tradition. They no
longer make phrases in praise of her civilizations. As for the
Commune, they expect to see it rise again later, and the
"established order" does absolutely nothing to prevent its return.
They are applying old remedies to new woes, remedies that have never
cured (nor prevented) the least ill. The reestablishment of credit
seems to me colossally absurd. One of my friends made a good speech
against it; the godson of your friend Michel de Bourges, Bardoux,
mayor of Clermont-Ferrand.

I think, like you, that the bourgeois republic can be established.
Its lack of elevation is perhaps a guarantee of stability. It will
be the first time that we have lived under a government without
principles. The era of positivism in politics is about to begin.

The immense disgust which my contemporaries give me throws me back
on the past, and I am working on my good Saint-Antoine with all my
might. I came to Paris only for it, for it is impossible for me to
get in Rouen the books that I need
now; I am lost in the religions of Persia. I am trying to get a
clear idea of the God Horn, and it isn't easy. I spent all the month
of June in studying Buddhism, on which I already had many notes. But
I wanted to get to the bottom of the subject as soon as possible.
And I also did a little Buddha that I consider charming. Don't I
want to read you that book (mine)!

I am not going to Nohant, for I don't care to go further I away from
my mother now. Her society afflicts me and unnerves me, my niece
Caroline takes turns with me in carrying on the dear and painful
burden.

In a fortnight I shall be back in Croisset. Between the 15th and the
20th of August I am expecting the good Tourgueneff there. It would
be very kind of you to come after him, dear master. I say come
after, for we have only one decent room since the visit of the
Prussians. Come, make a good effort. Come in September.

Have you any news of the Odeon? I can't get any response whatsoever
from de Chilly. I have been to his house several times and I have
written three letters to him: not a word! Those gay blades behave
towards one like great lords, which is charming.  I don't know if he
is still director, or if the management has been given to the
Berton, Laurent, Bernard company, do you?

Berton wrote to me to recommend him (and them) to d'Osmoy, deputy
and president of the dramatic commission, but since then I have not
heard anything mentioned.



CXCII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, August, 1871

You want to see me, and you need me, and you don't come see me! That
is not nice; for I too, and all of us here, sigh for you. We parted
so gaily eighteen months ago, and so many atrocious things have
happened in the meantime! Seeing each other would be the consolation
DUE us. For my part, I cannot stir, I have not a penny, and I have
to work like a negro. And then I have not seen a single Prussian,
and I would like to keep my eyes pure from that stain. Ah! my
friend, what years we are going through! We cannot go back again,
for hope departs with the rest.

What will be the reaction from the infamous Commune? Isidore or
Henry V. or the kingdom of incendiaries restored by anarchy? I who
have had so much patience with my species and who have so long
looked on the bright side, now see nothing but darkness. I judge
others by myself. I had improved my real character, I had
extinguished useless and dangerous enthusiasms, I had sowed grass
and flowers that grew well on my volcanoes, and I imagined that all
the world could become enlightened, could correct itself, or
restrain itself; that the years passed over me and over my
contemporaries could not be lost to reason and experience: and now I
awaken from a dream to find a generation divided between idiocy and
delirium tremens! Everything is possible at present.

However, it is bad to despair. I shall make a great effort, and
perhaps I shall become just and patient again; but today I cannot. I
am as troubled as you, and I don't dare to talk, nor to think, nor
to write, I have such a fear of touching the wounds open in every
soul.

I have indeed received your other letter, and I was waiting for
courage to answer it; I would like to do only good to those I love,
especially to you, who feel so keenly. I am no good at this moment.
I am filled with a devouring indignation and a disgust which is
killing me.

I love you, that is all I know. My children say the same. Embrace
your good little mother for me.

G. Sand



CXCIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 6 September, 1871

Where are you, my dear old troubadour?

I don't write to you, I am quite troubled in the depths of my soul.
But that will pass, I hope; but I am ill with the illness of my
nation and my race. I cannot isolate myself in my reason and in my
own IRREPROACHABILITY. I feel the great bonds loosened and, as it
were, broken. It seems to me that we are all going off, I don't know
where. Have you more courage than I have? Give me some of it?

I am sending you the pretty faces of our little girls. They remember
you, and tell me I must send you their pictures. Alas! they are
girls, we raise them with love like precious plants. What men will
they meet to protect them and continue our work? It seems to me that
in twenty years there will be only hypocrites and blackguards!

Give me news of yourself, tell me of your poor mother, your family,
of Croisset. Love us still, as we love you.

G. Sand



CXCIV. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Wednesday, 6 September

Well, dear master, it seems to me that you are forgetting your
troubadour, aren't you? Are you then quite overwhelmed with work!
How long a time it is since I saw your good firm writing! How long
it is since we have talked together! What a pity that we should live
so far from each other! I need you very much.

I don't dare to leave my poor mother! When I am obliged to be away,
Caroline comes to take my place. If it were not for that, I should
go to Nohant. Shall you stay there indefinitely? Must we wait till
the middle of the winter to embrace each other?

I should like very much to read you Saint-Antoine, which is half
done, then to stretch myself and to roar at your side.

Some one who knows that I love you and who admires you brought me a
copy of le Gaulois in which there were parts of an article by you on
the workmen, published in le Temps. How true it is! How just and
well said! Sad! Sad! Poor France! And they accuse me of being
skeptical.

But what do you think of Mademoiselle Papevoine, the incendiary,
who, in the midst of a barricade, submitted to the assaults  of
eighteen citizens! That surpasses the end of l'Education
sentimentale where they limit themselves to offering flowers.

But what goes beyond everything now, is the conservative party,
which is not even going to vote, and which is still in a panic! You
cannot imagine the alarm of the Parisians. "In six months, sir, the
Commune will be established everywhere" is the answer or rather the
universal groan.

I do not look forward to an imminent cataclysm because nothing that
is foreseen happens. The International will perhaps triumph in the
end, but not as it hopes, not as they dread. Ah! how tired I am of
the ignoble workmen, the incompetent bourgeois, the stupid peasant
and the odious ecclesiastic!

That is why I lose myself as much as I can in antiquity. Just now I
am making all the gods talk in a state of agony. The subtitle of my
book could be The Height of Insanity. And the printing of it
withdraws further and further into my mind. Why publish? Who pray is
bothering about art nowadays? I make literature for myself as a
bourgeois turns napkin rings in his garret. You will tell me that I
had better be useful. But how? How can I make people listen to me?

Tourgueneff has written me that he is going to stay in Paris all
winter beginning with October. That will be some one to talk to. For
I can't talk of anything whatever with anyone whatever.

I have been looking after the grave of my poor Bouilhet today; so
tonight I have a twofold bitterness.



CXCV. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, 8 September, 1871

Ah! how sweet they are! What darlings! What fine little heads so
serious and sweet! My mother was quite touched by it, and so was I.
That is what I call a delicate attention, dear master, and I thank
you very much for it. I envy Maurice, his existence is not arid as
mine is.  Our two letters crossed again. That proves beyond a doubt
that we feel the same things at the same time in the same degree.

Why are you so said?  Humanity offers nothing new.  Its irremediable
misery has filled me with sadness ever since my youth.  And in
addition I now have no disillusions.  I believe that the crowd, the
common herd will always be hateful.  The  only important thing is a
little group of minds--always the same--which passed the torch from
one to another.

As long as we do not bow to mandarins, as long as the Academy of
Sciences does not replace the pope, politics as a whole and society,
down to its very roots, will be nothing but collection of
disheartening humbugs. We are floundering in the after-birth of the
Revolution, which was an abortion, a failure,  a misfire, "whatever
they say." And the reason is that it proceeded from the Middle Ages
and Christianity. The idea of equality (which is all the modern
democracy) is an essentially Christian idea and opposed to that of
justice. Observe how mercy predominates now. Sentiment is
everything, justice is nothing. People are now not even indignant
against murderers, and the people who set fire to Paris are less
punished than the calumniator of M. Favre.

In order for France to rise again, she must pass from inspiration to
science, she must abandon all metaphysics, she must enter into
criticism, that is to say into the examination of things.

I am persuaded that we shall seem extremely imbecile to posterity.
The words republic and monarchy will make them laugh, as we on our
part, laughed, at realism and nominalism. For I defy anyone to show
me an essential difference between those two terms. A modern
republic and a constitutional monarchy are identical. Never mind!
They are squabbling about that, they are shouting, they are
fighting!

As for the good people, "free and compulsory" education will do it.
When every one is able to read le Petit Journal and le Figaro, they
won't read anything else, because the bourgeois and the rich man
read only these. The press is a school of demoralization, because it
dispenses with thinking. Say that, you will be brave, and if you
prevail, you will have rendered a fine service.

The first remedy will be to finish up with universal suffrage, the
shame of the human mind. As it is constituted, one single element
prevails to the detriment of all the others: numbers dominate over
mind, education, race and even money, which is worth more than
numbers.

But society (which always needs a good God, a Saviour), isn't it
perhaps capable of taking care of itself? The conservative party has
not even the instinct of the brute (for the brute at least knows how
to fight for its lair and its living). It will be divided by the
Internationals, the Jesuits of the future. But those of the past,
who had neither country nor justice, have not succeeded and the
International will founder because it is in the wrong. No ideas,
nothing but greed!

Ah! dear, good master, if you only could hate! That is what you
lack, hate. In spite of your great Sphinx eyes, you have seen the
world through a golden color. That comes from the sun in your heart;
but so many shadows have arisen that now you are not recognizing
things any more. Come now! Cry out! Thunder! Take your great lyre
and touch the brazen string: the monsters will flee. Bedew us with
the drops of the blood of wounded Themis.

Why do you feel "the great bonds broken?" What is broken? Your bonds
are indestructible, your sympathy can attach itself only to the
Eternal.

Our ignorance of history makes us slander our own times. Man has
always been like that. Several years of quiet deceived us. That is
all. I too, I used to believe in the amelioration of manners. One
must wipe out that mistake and think of oneself no more highly than
they did in the time of Pericles or of Shakespeare, atrocious epochs
in which fine things were done. Tell me that you are lifting your
head and that you are thinking of your old troubadour, who cherishes
you.



CXCVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croisset
Nohant, 8 September, 1871

As usual our letters have crossed; you should receive today the
portraits of my little grandchildren, not pretty at this period of
their growth, but with such beautiful eyes that they can never be
ugly.

You see that I am as disheartened as you are and indignant, alas!
without being able to hate either the human race or our poor, dear
country. But one feels too much one's helplessness to pluck up one's
heart and spirit. One works all the same, even if only turning
napkin rings, as you say: and, as for me, while serving the public,
I think about it as little as possible. Le Temps has done me the
service of making me rummage in my waste basket. I find there the
prophecies that the conscience of each of us has inspired in him,
and these little returns to the past ought to give us courage; but
it is not at all so. The lessons of experience are of no use until
too late.

I think that without subvention, the Odeon will be in no condition
to put on well a literary play such as Aisse, and that you should
not let them murder it. You had better wait and see what happens. As
for the Berton company, I have no news of it; it is touring the
provinces, and those who compose it will not be reengaged by Chilly,
who is furious with them.

The Odeon has let Reynard go, an artist of the first rank, whom
Montigny had the wit to engage. There really is no one left at the
Odeon, as far as I know. Why don't you consider the Theatre
Francais?

Where is the Princess Mathilde? At Enghien, or in Paris, or in
England? I am sending you a note which you must enclose in the first
letter that you have occasion to write to her.

I cannot go to see you, dear old man, and yet I had earned one of
those happy vacations; but I cannot leave the HOME, for all sorts of
reasons too long to tell and of no interest, but inflexible. I do
not know even if I shall go to Paris this winter. Here am I so old!
I imagine that I can only bore others and that people cannot endure
me anywhere except at home. You absolutely must come to see me with
Tourgueneff, since you are planning to go away this winter; prepare
him for this abduction. I embrace you, as I love, and my world does
too.

G. Sand



CXCVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
14 September, 1871, Nohant
[Footnote: Appeared in le Temps, 3 October, 1871, under the title,
Reponse a un ami, and published in Impressions et Souvenirs, p. 53.]

And what, you want me to stop loving? You want me to say that I have
been mistaken all my life, that humanity is contemptible, hateful,
that it has always been and always will be so? And you chide my
anguish as a weakness, and puerile regret for a lost illusion? You
assert that the people has always been ferocious, the priest always
hypocritical, the bourgeois always cowardly, the soldier always
brigand, the peasant always stupid? You say that you have known all
that ever since your youth and you rejoice that you never have
doubted it, because maturity has not brought you any disappointment;
have you not been young then? Ah! We are entirely different, for I
have never ceased to be young, if being young is always loving.

What, then, do you want me to do, so as to isolate myself from my
kind, from my compatriots, from my race, from the great family in
whose bosom my own family is only one ear of corn in the terrestrial
field? And if only this ear could ripen in a sure place, if only one
could, as you say, live for certain privileged persons and withdraw
from all the others!

But it is impossible, and your steady reason puts up with the most
unrealizable of Utopias. In what Eden, in what fantastic Eldorado
will you hide your family, your little group of friends, your
intimate happiness, so that the lacerations of the social state and
the disasters of the country shall not reach them? If you want to be
happy through certain people--those certain people, the favorites of
your heart, must be happy in themselves. Can they be? Can you assure
them the least security?

Will you find me a refuge in my old age which is drawing near to
death? And what difference now does death or life make to me for
myself? Let us suppose that we die absolutely, or that love does not
follow into the other life, are we not up to our last breath
tormented by the desire, by the imperious need of assuring those
whom we leave behind all the happiness possible? Can we go
peacefully to sleep when we feel the shaken earth ready to swallow
up all those for whom we have lived? A continuous happy life with
one's family in spite of all, is without doubt relatively a great
good, the only consolation that one could and that one would enjoy.
But even supposing external evil does not penetrate into our house,
which is impossible, you know very well, I could not approve of
acquiescing in indifference to what causes public unhappiness.

All that was foreseen. ... Yes, certainly, I had foreseen it as well
as anyone! I saw the storm rising. I was aware, like all those who
do not live without thinking, of the evident approach of the
cataclysm. When one sees the patient writhing in agony is there any
consolation in understanding his illness thoroughly? When lightning
strikes, are we calm because we have heard the thunder rumble a long
time before?

No, no, people do not isolate themselves, the ties of blood are not
broken, people do not curse or scorn their kind. Humanity is not a
vain word. Our life is composed of love, and not to love is to cease
to live.

The people, you say! The people is yourself and myself. It would be
useless to deny it. There are not two races, the distinction of
classes only establishes relative and for the most part illusory
inequalities. I do not know if your ancestors were high up in the
bourgeoisie; for my part, on my mother's side my roots spring
directly from the people, and I feel them continually alive in the
depth of my being. We all have them, even if the origin is more or
less effaced; the first men were hunters and shepherds, then farmers
and soldiers. Brigandage
crowned with success gave birth to the first social distinctions.
There is perhaps not a title that was not acquired through the blood
of men. We certainly have to endure our ancestors when we have any,
but these first trophies of hatred and of violence, are they a glory
in which a mind ever so little inclined to be philosophical, finds
grounds for pride? THE PEOPLE ALWAYS FEROCIOUS, you say? As for me,
I say, the nobility always savage!

And certainly, together with the peasants, the nobility is the class
most hostile to progress, the least civilized in consequence.
Thinkers should congratulate themselves on not being of it, but if
we are bourgeois, if we have come from the serf, and from the class
liable to forced labor, can we bend with love and respect before the
sons of the oppressors of our fathers? Whoever denies the people
cheapens himself, and gives to the world the shameful spectacle of
apostasy. Bourgeoisie, if we want to raise ourselves again and
become once more a class, we have only one thing to do, and that is
to proclaim ourselves the people, and to fight to the death against
those who claim to be our superiors by divine right. On account of
having failed in the dignity of our revolutionary mandate, of having
aped the nobility, of having usurped its insignia, of having taken
possession of its playthings, of having been shamefully ridiculous
and cowardly, we count for nothing; we are nothing any more: the
people, which ought to unite with us, denies us, abandons us and
seeks to oppress us.

The people ferocious? No, it is not imbecile either, its real
trouble is in being ignorant and foolish. It is not the people of
Paris that has massacred the prisoners, destroyed the monuments, and
tried to burn the town. The people of Paris is all who stayed in
Paris after the siege, since whoever had any means hastened to
breathe the air of the provinces and to embrace their absent
families after the physical and moral sufferings of the siege. Those
who stayed in Paris were the merchant and the workman, those two
agents of labor and of exchange, without whom Paris would exist no
longer. Those are what constitutes positively the people of Paris;
it is one and the same family, whose political blunders cannot
restore their relationship and solidarity. It is now recognized that
the oppressors of that torment were in the minority. Then the people
of Paris was not disposed to fury, since the majority gave evidence
only of weakness and fear. The movement was organized by men already
enrolled in the ranks of the bourgeoisie, who belong no longer to
the habits and needs of the proletariat. These men were moved by
hatred, disappointed ambition, mistaken patriotism, fanaticism
without an ideal, sentimental folly or natural maliciousness--there
was all that in them--and even certain doctrinaire points of honor,
unwilling to withdraw in the face of danger. They certainly did not
lean on the middle class, which trembled, fled or hid itself. They
were forced to put in action the real proletariat which had nothing
to lose. Well, the proletariat even escaped them to a great degree,
divided as it was by various shades of opinion, some wanting
disorder to profit by it, others dreading the consequences of being
drawn in, the most of them not reasoning at all, because the evil
had become extreme and the lack of work forced them to go to war at
thirty sous a day.

Why should you maintain that this proletariat which was shut up in
Paris, and was at most eighty thousand soldiers of hunger and
despair, represented the people of France? They do not even
represent the people of Paris, unless you desire to maintain the
distinction between the producer and the trader, which I reject.

But I want to follow you up and ask on what this distinction rests.
Is it on more or less education? The limit is incomprehensible if
you see at the top of the bourgeoisie, cultivated and learned
people, if you see at the bottom of the proletariat, savages and
brutes, you have none the less the crowd of intermediaries which
will show to you, here intelligent and wise proletarians, there
bourgeois who are neither wise nor intelligent. The great number of
civilized citizens dates from yesterday and many of those who know
how to read and write, have parents still living who can hardly sign
their names.

Would it then be only more or less wealth that would classify men
into two distinct parties? The question then is where the people
begins and where it ends, for each day competencies shift, ruin
lowers one, and fortune raises another; roles change, he who was a
bourgeois this morning is going to become again a proletarian this
evening, and the proletarian of just now, may turn into a bourgeois
in a day, if he finds a purse, or inherits from an uncle.

You can well see that these denominations have become idle and that
the work of classifying, whatever method one desired to use, would
be impracticable.

Men are only over or under one another because of more or less
reason or morality. Instruction which develops only egoistic
sensuality is not as good as the ignorance of the proletarian,
honest by instinct or by custom. This compulsory education which we
all desire through respect for human rights, is not, however, a
panacea whose miracles need to be exaggerated. Evil natures will
find there only more ingenious and more hidden means to do evil. It
will be as in all the things that man uses and abuses, both the
poison and the antidote. It is an illusion that one can find an
infallible remedy for our woes. We have to seek from day to day, all
the means immediately possible, we must think of nothing else in
practical life except the amelioration of habits and the
reconciliation of interests. France is agonizing, that is certain;
we are all sick, all corrupt, all ignorant, all discouraged: to say
that it was WRITTEN, that it had to be so, that it has always been
and will always be, is to begin again the fable of the pedagogue and
the child who is drowning. You might as well say at once.

It is all the same to me; but if you add: That does not concern me,
you are wrong. The deluge comes and death captures us. In vain you
are prudent and withdraw, your refuge will be invaded in its turn,
and in perishing with human civilization you will be no greater a
philosopher for not having loved, than those who threw themselves
into the flood to save some debris of humanity. The debris is not
worth the effort, very good! They will perish none the less, that is
possible. We shall perish with them, that is certain, but we shall
die while in the fulness of life. I prefer that to a hibernation in
the ice, to an anticipated death. And anyway, I could not do
otherwise. Love does not reason. If I asked why you have the passion
for study, you would not explain it to me any better than those who
have a passion for idleness can explain their indolence.

Then you think me upset, since you preach detachment to me? You tell
me that you have read in the papers some extracts from my articles
which indicate a change of ideas, and these papers which quote me
with good will, endeavor to believe that I am illuminated with a new
light, while others which do not quote me believe that perhaps I am
deserting the cause of the future. Let the politicians think and say
what they want to. Let us leave them to their critical
appreciations. I do not have to protest, I do not have to answer,
the public has other interests to discuss than those of my
personality. I wield a pen, I have an honorable position of free
discussion in a great paper; if I have been wrongly interpreted, it
is for me to explain myself better when the occasion presents
itself. I am reluctant to seize this opportunity of talking of
myself as an isolated individual; but if you judge me converted to
false notions, I must say to you and to others who are interested in
me: read me as a whole, and do not judge me by detached fragments; a
spirit which is independent of party exactions, sees necessarily the
pros and cons, and the sincere writer tells both without busying
himself about the blame or the approbation of partizan readers. But
every being who is not mad maintains a certain consistency, and I do
not think that I have departed from mine. Reason and sentiment are
always in accord in me to make me repulse whatever attempts to make
me revert to childhood in politics, in religion, in philosophy, in
art. My sentiment and my reason combat more than ever the idea of
factitious distinctions, the inequality of conditions imposed as a
right acquired by some, as a loss deserved by others. More than ever
I feel the need of raising what is low, and of lifting again what
has fallen. Until my heart is worn out it will be open to pity, it
will take the part of the weak, it will rehabilitate the slandered.
If today it is the people that is under foot, I shall hold out my
hand to the people--if it is the oppressor and executioner, I shall
tell it that it is cowardly and odious. What do I care for this or
that group of men, these names which have become standards, these
personalities which have become catchwords? I know only wise and
foolish, innocent and guilty. I do not have to ask myself where are
my friends or my enemies. They are where torment has thrown them.
Those who have deserved my love, and who do not see through my eyes,
are none the less dear to me. The thoughtless blame of those who
leave me does not make me consider them as enemies. All friendship
unjustly withdrawn remains intact in the heart that has not merited
the outrage. That heart is above self-love, it knows how to wait for
the awakening of justice and affection.

Such is the correct and easy role of a conscience that is not
engaged in the party interests through any personal interest. Those
who can not say that of themselves will certainly have success in
their environment, if they have the talent to avoid all that can
displease them, and the more they have of this talent, the more they
will find the means to satisfy their passions. But do not summon
them in history to witness the absolute truth. From the moment that
they make a business of their opinion, their opinion has no value.

I know sweet, generous and timorous souls, who in this terrible
moment of our history, reproach themselves for having loved and
served the cause of the weak. They see only one point in space, they
believe that the people whom they have loved and served exist no
longer, because in their place a horde of bandits followed by a
little army of bewildered men has occupied momentarily the theatre
of the struggle.

These good souls have to make an effort to say to themselves that
what good there was in the poor and what interest there was in the
disinherited still exists, only it is no longer in evidence and the
political disturbance has sidetracked it from the stage. When such
dramas take place, those who rush in light-heartedly are the vain or
the greedy members of the family, those who allow themselves to be
pulled in are the idiots.

There is no doubt that there are greedy souls, idiots, and vain
persons by the thousands in France; but there are as many and
perhaps more in the other states. Let an opportunity present itself
similar to too frequent opportunities which put our evil passions in
play, and you will see whether other nations are any better than we
are. Wait till the Germanic race gets to work, the race whose
disciplinary aptitudes we admire, the race whose armies have just
shown us brutal appetites in all their barbarous simplicity, and you
will see what will be its license! The people of Paris will seem
sober and virtuous by comparison.

That ought not to be what is called a crumb of comfort, we shall
have to pity the German nation for its victories as much as
ourselves for our defeats, because this is the first act of its
moral dissolution. The drama of its degradation has begun, and as
this is being worked out by its own hands it will move very quickly.
All these great material organizations in which right, justice, and
the respect for humanity are not recognized, are colossi of clay, as
we have found to our cost. Well! the  moral abasement of Germany is
not the future safety of France, and if we are called upon to return
to her the evil that has been done us, her collapse will not give us
back our  life. It is not in blood that races are re-invigorated and
rejuvenated. Vital exhalations can issue still from the corpse of
France, that of Germany will be the focus of the pestilence of
Europe. A nation that has lost its ideals does not survive itself.
Its death fertilizes nothing and those who breathe its fetid
emanations are struck by the ill that killed it. Poor Germany! the
cup of the wrath of the Eternal is poured out on you quite as much
as on us, and while you rejoice and become intoxicated, the
philosophic spirit is weeping over you and prepares your  epitaph.
This pale and bleeding, wounded thing that is called France, holds
still in its tense hands, a fold of the starry mantle of the future,
and you drape yourself in a soiled flag, which will be your winding
sheet. Past grandeurs have no longer a place to take in the history
of men. It is all over with kings who exploit the peoples; it is all
over with exploited   peoples who have consented to their own
abasement.

That is why we are so sick and why my heart is broken.

But it is not in scorn of our misery that I regard the extent of it.
I do not want to believe that this holy country, that this cherished
race, all of whose chords I feel vibrate in me, both harmonious and
discordant,--whose qualities and whose defects I love in spite of
everything, all of whose good or bad responsibilities I consent to
accept rather than to detach  myself from them through disdain; no,
I do not want to believe that my country and my race are struck to
death, I feel it in my suffering, in my mourning, in my hours of
pure dejection even, I love, therefore I live; let us love and live.

Frenchmen, let us love one another, my God! my God! 1et us love one
another or we are lost. Let us destroy, let us deny, let us
annihilate politics, since it divides us and arms us against one
another; let us ask from no one what he was and what he wanted
yesterday. Yesterday all the world was mistaken, let us know what we
want today. If it is not liberty for all and fraternity towards all,
do not let us attempt to solve the problem of humanity, we are not
worthy of defining it, we are not capable of comprehending it.
Equality is a thing that does not impose itself, it is a free plant
that grows only on fertile lands, in salubrious air. It does not
take root on barricades, we know that now! It is immediately trodden
under the foot of the conqueror, whoever he may be. Let us desire to
establish it in our customs, let us be eager to consecrate it in our
ideas. Let us give it for a starting point, patriotic charity, love!
It is the part of a madman to think that one issues from a battle
with respect for human rights. All civil war has brought forth and
will bring forth great crime....

Unfortunate International, is it true that you believe in the lie
that strength is superior to right? If you are as numerous, as
powerful as one fancies, is it possible that you profess destruction
and hatred as a duty? No, your power is a phantom of death. A great
number of men of every nationality would not, could not, deliberate
and act in favor of an iniquitous principle. If you are the
ferocious party of the European people, something like the
Anabaptists of Munster, like them you will destroy yourself with
your own hands. If, on the contrary, you are a great and legitimate
fraternal association, your duty is to enlighten your adherents and
to deny those who cheapen and compromise your principles. I hope
still that you include in your bosom, humane and hard-working men in
great numbers, and that they suffer and blush at seeing bandits take
shelter under your name. In this case your silence is inept and
cowardly. Have you not a single member capable of protesting against
ignoble attacks, against idiotic principles, against furious
madness? Your chosen chiefs, your governors, your inspirers, are
they all brigands and idiots? No, it is impossible; there are no
groups, there is no club, there are no crossroads where a voice of
truth could not make itself heard. Speak then, justify yourself,
proclaim your gospel. Dissolve yourself in order to make yourself
over if the discord is in your own midst. Make an appeal to the
future if you are not an ancient invasion of Barbarians. Tell those
who still love the people what they ought to do for them, and if you
have nothing to say, if you cannot speak a word of life, if the
iniquities of your mysteries are sealed by fear, renounce noble
sympathies, live on the scorn of honest folk, and struggle between
the jailer and the police.

All France has heard the word of your destiny which might have been
the word of hers. She has waited for it in vain. I too, simple, I
waited. While blaming the means I did not want to prejudice the end.
There has always been one in revolutions, and the revolutions that
fail are not always those with the weakest basis. A patriotic
fanaticism seems to have been the first sentiment of this struggle.
These lost children of the democratic army were going perhaps to
subscribe to an inevitable peace that they judged shameful: Paris
had sworn to bury herself under her ruins.

The democratic people were going to force the bourgeois to keep
their word. They took possession of the cannon, they were going to
turn them on the Prussians, it was mad, but it was grand.... Not at
all. The first act of the Commune is to consent to the peace, and in
all the course of its management, it does not have an insult, not a
threat for the enemy, it conceives and commits the remarkable
cowardice of overturning under the eyes of the enemy the column that
recalls his defeats and our victories. It is angry against the
powers emanating from universal suffrage, and yet it invokes this
suffrage in Paris to constitute itself. It is true that this was not
favorable to it; it dispenses with the appearance of legality that
it intended to give itself and functions by brute force, without
invoking any other right than that of hate and scorn for all that is
not itself. It proclaims POSITIVE SOCIAL SCIENCE of which it calls
itself the sole depository, but about which it does not let a word
escape in its deliberations and in its decrees.  It declares that it
is going to free man from his shackles and his prejudices, and at
that very instant, it exercises a power without control and
threatens with death whoever is not convinced of its infallibility.
At the same time it pretends to take up the tradition of the
Jacobins, it usurps the papal social authority and assumes the
dictatorship. What sort of a republic is that? I see nothing vital
in it, nothing rational, nothing constituted, nothing constitutable.
It is an orgy of false reformers who have not one idea, not one
principle, not the least serious organization, not the least
solidarity with the nation, not the least outlook towards the
future. Ignorance, cynicism and brutality, that is all that emanates
from this false social revolution. Liberation of the lowest
instincts, impotence of bold ambitions, scandal of shameless
usurpations. That is the spectacle which we have just seen.
Moreover, this Commune has inspired the most deadly disgust in the
most ardent political men, men most devoted to the democracy. After
useless essays, they have understood that there was no
reconciliation possible where there were no principles; they
withdrew from it with consternation, with sorrow, and, the next day,
the Commune declared them traitors, and decreed their arrest. They
would have been shot if they had remained in its hands.

And you, friend, you want me to see these things with a stoic
indifference? You want me to say: man is made thus, crime is his
expression, infamy is his nature?

No, a hundred times no. Humanity is outraged in me and with me. We
must not dissimulate nor try to forget this indignation which is one
of the most passionate forms of love. We must make great efforts in
behalf of brotherhood to repair the ravages of hate. We must put an
end to the scourge, wipe out infamy with scorn, and inaugurate by
faith the resurrection of the country.

G. Sand



CXCVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 16 September, 1871

Dear old friend,

I answered you day before yesterday, and my letter took such
proportions that I sent it as an article to le Temps for my next
fortnightly contribution; for I have promised to give them two
articles a month. The letter a un ami does not indicate you by even
an initial, for I do not want to argue against you in public. I tell
you again in it my reasons for suffering and for hoping still. I
shall send it to you and that will be talking with you again. You
will see that my chagrin is a part of me, and that believing
progress to be a dream does not depend on me. Without this hope no
one is good for anything. The mandarins do not need knowledge and
even the education of a limited number of people has no longer
reason for existing unless there is hope of influence on the masses;
philosophers have only to keep silent and those great minds on whom
the need of your soul leans, Shakespeare, Moliere, Voltaire, etc.
have no reason for existing and for expressing themselves.

Come, let me suffer! That is worth more than viewing INJUSTICE WITH
A SERENE COUNTENANCE, as Shakespeare says. When I have drained my
cup of bitterness, I shall feel better. I am a woman, I have
affections, sympathies, and wrath. I shall never be a sage, nor a
scholar.

I received a kind little note from the Princess Mathilde. Is she
then again settled in Paris? Has she anything to live on from the
effects of M. Demidoff, her late and I think unworthy husband? On
the whole it is brave and good of her to return near to her friends,
at the risk of new upsets.

I am glad that these little faces of children pleased you. I embrace
you very much, you are so kind, I was sure of it. Although you are a
mandarin, I do not think that you are like a Chinaman at all, and I
love you with a full heart.

I am working like a convict.

G. Sand



CXCIX. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear master, I received your article yesterday, and I should answer
it at length if I were not in the midst of preparations for my
departure for Paris. I am going to try to finish up with Aisse.

The middle of your letter made me SHED A TEAR, without converting
me, of course. I was moved, that was all, without being persuaded.

I look vainly in your article for one word: "justice," and all our
ill comes from forgetting absolutely that first notion of morality,
which to my way of thinking composes all morality. Humanitarianism,
sentiment, the ideal, have played us sufficiently mean tricks for us
to try righteousness and science.

If France does not pass in a short time to the crisis, I believe
that she will be irrevocably lost. Free compulsory education will do
nothing but augment the number of imbeciles. Renan has said that
very well in the preface to his Questions contemporaines. What we
need most of all, is a natural, that is to say, a legitimate
aristocracy. No one can do anything without a head, and universal
suffrage as it exists is more stupid than divine right. You will see
remarkable things if they let it keep on! The masses, the numbers,
are always idiotic. I have few convictions, but I have that one
strongly. But the masses must be respected, however inept they may
be, because they contain the germs of an incalculable fecundity.
Give it liberty but not power.

I believe no more than you do in class distinction. Castes belong to
archeology. But I believe that the poor hate the rich, and that the
rich are afraid of the poor. It will be so forever. It is as useless
to preach love to the one as to the other. The most important thing
is to instruct the rich, who, on the whole, are the strongest.
Enlighten the bourgeois first, for he knows nothing, absolutely
nothing. The whole dream of democracy is to elevate the proletarian
to the level of the imbecility of the bourgeois. The dream is partly
accomplished. He reads the same papers and has the same passions.

The three degrees of education have shown within the last year what
they can accomplish: (1) higher education made Prussia win; (2)
secondary education, bourgeois, produced the men of the 4th of
September; (3) primary education gave us the Commune. Its minister
of public instruction was the great Valles, who boasted that he
scorned Homer!

In three years every Frenchman can know how to read. Do you think
that we shall be the better off? Imagine on the other hand that in
each commune, there was ONE bourgeois, only one, who had read
Bastiat, and that this bourgeois was respected, things would change.

However I am not discouraged as you are, and the present government
pleases me, because it has no principle, no metaphysics, no humbug.
I express myself very badly. Moreover you deserve a different
response, but I am much hurried.

I hear today that the mass of the Parisians regrets Badinguet. A
plebiscite would declare for him, I do not doubt it, universal
suffrage is such a fine thing.



CC. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 10 October, 1871

I am answering your post scriptum, if I had answered Flaubert I
should not have ... ANSWERED, knowing well that your heart does not
always agree with your mind, a discordance into which we all
moreover are continually compelled to fall. I answered a part of a
letter of some friend whom no one knows, no one can recognize, since
I address myself to a part of your reasoning that is not you
entirely.

You are a troubadour all the same, and if I had to write to you
PUBLICLY the character would be what it ought to be. But our real
discussions ought to remain between ourselves, like caresses between
lovers, and even sweeter, since friendship also has its mysteries
without the storms of personality.

That letter that you wrote me in haste, is full of well expressed
truths against which I do not protest. But the connection and
agreement between your truths of reason and my truths of sentiment
must be found. France, alas! is neither on your side nor my side;
she is on the side of blindness, ignorance and folly. Oh! that I do
not deny, it is exactly that over which I despair.

Is this a time to put on Aisse? You told me it was a thing of
distinction, delicate like all that HE did, and I hear that the
public of the theatres is more THICKHEADED than ever. You would do
well to see two or three plays, no matter which, in order to
appreciate the literary condition of the Parisian. The provinces
will contribute less than in the past. The little fortunes are too
much cut down to permit frequent trips to Paris.

If Paris offered, as in my youth, an intelligent and influential
nucleus, a good play would perhaps not have a hundred performances,
but a bad play would not have three hundred. But this nucleus has
become imperceptible and its influence is swamped. Who then will
fill the theatres? The shopkeepers of Paris, without a guide, and
without good criticism? Well, you are not the master in the matter
of Aisse. There is an heir who is impatient, probably.--They write
me that Chilly is very; seriously ill, and that Pierre Berton is
reengaged.

You must be very busy; I will not write a long letter to you.

I embrace you affectionately, my children love you and ask to be
remembered to you.

G. Sand



CCI. TO GEORGE SAND

Never, dear good master, have you given such a proof of your
inconceivable candor! Now, seriously, you think that you have
offended me! The first page is almost like excuses! It made me laugh
heartily! Besides, you can always say everything to me, to me!
everything! Your blows will be caresses to me.

Now let us talk again! I continually repeat my insistence on
justice! Do you see how they are denying it everywhere? Has not
modern criticism abandoned art for history? The intrinsic value of a
book is nothing in the school of Sainte-Beuve and Taine. They take
everything into consideration there except talent. Thence, in the
petty journals, the abuse of personality, the biographies, the
diatribes. Conclusion: lack of respect on the part of the public.

In the theatre, the same thing. They don't bother about the play,
but the lesson to be preached. Our friend Dumas dreams the glory of
Lacordaire, or rather of Ravignan! To prevent the tucking up of
petticoats has become with him obsession. We can not have progressed
very far since all morality consists for women, in not committing
adultery, and for men in abstaining from theft! In short, the first
injustice is practised by literature; it has no interest in
esthetics, which is only a higher justice. The romantics will have a
fine account to render with their immoral sentimentality. Do you
recall a bit of Victor Hugo in la Legende des siecles, where a
sultan is saved because he had pity on a pig? it is always the story
of the penitent thief blessed because he has repented! To repent is
good, but not to do evil is better. The school of rehabilitations
has led us to see no difference between a rascal and an honest man.
I became enraged once before witnesses, against Sainte-Beuve, while
begging him to have as much indulgence for Balzac as he had for
Jules Lecomte. He answered me, calling me a dolt! That is where
BREADTH OF VIEW leads you.

They have so lost all sense of proportion, that the war council at
Versailles treats Pipe-en-Bois more harshly than M. Courbet,
Maroteau is condemned to death like Rossel! It is madness! These
gentlemen, however, interest me very little. I think that they
should have condemned to the galleys all the Commune, and have
forced these bloody imbeciles to clear up the ruins of Paris, with a
chain on their necks, like ordinary convicts. But that would have
wounded HUMANITY. They are kind to the mad dogs, and not at all to
the people whom the dogs have bitten.

That will not change so long as universal suffrage is what it is.
Every man (as I think), no matter how low he is, has a right to ONE
voice, his own, but he is not the equal of his neighbor, who may be
worth a hundred times more. In an industrial enterprise (Societe
anonyme), each holder votes according to the value of his
contribution. It ought to be so in the government of a nation. I am
worth fully twenty electors of Croisset. Money, mind, and even race
ought to be reckoned, in short every resource. But up to the present
I only see one! numbers! Ah! dear master, you who have so authority,
you ought to take the lead. Your articles in le Temps, which have
had a great success, are widely read and who knows? You would
perhaps do France a great service?

Aisse keeps me very busy, or rather provokes me. I have not seen
Chilly, I have had to do with Duquesnel. They are depriving me
definitely of the senior Berton and proposing his son. He is very
nice, but he is not at all the type conceived by the author. The
Theatre Francais perhaps would ask nothing better than to take
Aisse! I am very perplexed, and it is going to be necessary for me
to decide. As for waiting till a literary wind arises, as it will
never arise in my lifetime, it is better to risk the thing at once.

These theatrical affairs disturb me greatly, for I was in great
form. For the last month I was even in an exaltation bordering on
madness!

I have met the unavoidable Harrisse, a man who knows everyone, and
who is a judge of everything, theatre, novels, finances, politics,
etc. What a race is that of enlightened men!!! I have seen Plessy,
charming and always beautiful. She asked me to send you a thousand
friendly messages.

For my part, I send you a hundred thousand affectionate greetings.

Your old friend



CCII. TO GEORGE SAND
14 November, 1871

Ouf! I have just finished MY GODS, that is to say the mythological
part of my Saint-Antoine, on which I have been working since the
beginning of June. How I want to read it to you, dear master of the
good God!

Why did you resist your good impulse? Why didn't you come this
autumn? You should not stay so long without seeing Paris. I shall be
there day after tomorrow, and I shall have no amusement there at all
this winter, what with Aisse, a volume of verse to be printed (I
should like to show you the preface), and Heaven knows what else. A
lot of things that are not at all diverting.

I did not receive the second article that was announced. Your old
troubadour has an aching head. My longest nights these three months
have not exceeded five hours. I have been grubbing in a frantic
manner. Furthermore, I think I have brought my book to a pretty
degree of insanity. The idea of the foolish things that it will make
the bourgeois utter sustains me, or rather I don't need to be
sustained, as such a situation pleases me naturally.

The good bourgeois is becoming more and more stupid! He does not
even go to vote! The brute beasts surpass him in their instinct for
self-preservation. Poor France! Poor us!

What do you think I am reading now to distract myself? Bichat and
Cabanis, who amuse me enormously. They knew how to write books then.
Ah! how far our doctors of today are from those men!

We suffer from one thing only: Absurdity. But it is formidable and
universal. When they talk of the brutishness of the plebe, they are
saying an unjust, incomplete thing. Conclusion: the enlightened
classes must be enlightened. Begin by the head, which is the
sickest, the rest will follow.

You are not like me! You are full of compassion. There are days when
I choke with wrath, I would like to drown my contemporaries in
latrines, or at least deluge their cockscombs with torrents of
abuse, cataracts of invectives. Why? I wonder myself.

What sort of archeology is Maurice busy with? Embrace your little
girls warmly for me.

Your old friend



CCIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 23 November, 1871

I hear from Plauchut that you won't let yourself be abducted for our
Christmas Eve REVELS. You say you have too much to do. That is so
much the worse for us, who would have had such pleasure in seeing
you.--You were at Ch. Edmond's successful play, you are well, you
have a great deal to do, you still detest the silly bourgeois; and
with all that, is Saint-Antoine finished and shall we read it soon?

I am giving you an easy commission to do, this is it: I have had to
aid a respectable and interesting person [Footnote:  Mademoiselle de
Flaugergues.] to whom the Prussians have left for a bed and chair,
only an old garden bench. I sent her 300 francs, she needed 600. I
begged from kind souls. They sent me what was necessary, all except
the Princess Mathilde, from whom I asked 200 francs. She answered me
the 19th of this month: HOW SHALL I SEND THIS TO YOU?

I replied the same day; simply by mail. But I have received nothing.
I do not insist, but I fear that the money may have been stolen or
lost, and I am asking you to clear up the affair as quickly as
possible.

With this, I embrace you, and Lolo, AURORE EMBRACES YOU TOO and all
the family which loves you.

G. Sand

[The words 'Aurore embraces you too' were written by the little girl
herself.]



CCIV. TO GEORGE SAND
1 December

Your letter which I have just found again, makes me remorseful, for
I have not yet done your errand to the princess. I was several days
without knowing where the princess was. She was to have come to get
settled in Paris, and send me word of her arrival. Today at last I
learn that she is at Saint-Gratien where I shall go on Sunday
evening probably. Anyway your commission shall be done next week.

You must forgive me, for I have not had for the last two weeks ten
minutes of freedom. The revival of Ruy Blas which was going to be
put ahead of Aisse had to be PUT OFF (it was a hard job). Well, the
rehearsals are to begin on Monday next. I read the play to the
actors today, and the roles are to be verified tomorrow. I think it
will go well. I have had Bouilhet's volume of verse printed, the
preface of which I re-wrote. In short I am worn out! and sad! sad
enough to croak. When I have to get into action I throw myself into
it head first. But my heart is breaking in disgust. That is the
truth.

I have seen none of our friends except Tourgueneff, whom I have
found more charming than ever. Give a good kiss to Aurore for her
sweet message, and let her kiss you for me.

Your old friend



CCV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 7 December, 1871

The money was stolen, I did not receive it, and it can not be
claimed, for the sender would be liable to a suit. Thank the
princess just the same for me, and for poor Mademoiselle de
Flaugergues whom by the way, the minister is aiding with 200 francs.
Her pension is 800.

You are in the midst of rehearsals, I pity you, and yet I imagine
that in working for a friend one puts more heart in it, more
confidence and much more patience. Patience, there is everything in
that, and that is acquired.

I love you and I embrace you, how I would like to have you at
Christmas! You can not, so much the worse for us. We shall drink you
a toast and many speaches [sic].

G. Sand



CCVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 4 January, 1872

I want to embrace you at the first of the year and tell you that I
love my old troubadour now and always, but I don't want you to
answer me, you are in the thick of theatrical things, and you have
not the time and the calmness to write. Here we called you at the
stroke of midnight on Christmas, we called your name three times,
did you hear it at all?

We are all getting on well, our little girls are growing, we speak
of you often; my children embrace you also. May our affection bring
you good luck!

G. Sand



CCVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Sunday, January, 1872

At last I have a moment of quiet and I can write to you. But I have
so many things to chat with you about, that I hardly know where to
begin: (1) Your little letter of the 4th of January, which came the
very morning of the premiere of Aisse, moved me to tears, dear well-
beloved master. You are the only one who shows such delicacies of
feeling.

The premiere was splendid, and then, that is all. The next night the
theatre was almost empty. The press, in general, was stupid and
base. They accused me of having wanted to advertise by INSERTING an
incendiary tirade! I pass for a Red (sic). You see where we are!

The management of the Odeon has done nothing for the play! On the
contrary. The day of the premiere it was I who brought with my own
hands the properties for the first act! And on the third performance
I led the supernumeraries.

Throughout the rehearsals they advertised in the papers the revival
of Ruy Blas, etc., etc. They made me strangle la Baronne quite as
Ruy Blas will strangle Aisse. In short, Bouilhet's heir will get
very little money. Honor is saved, that is all.

I have had Dernieres Chansons printed. You will receive this volume
at the same time as Aisse and a letter of mine to the Conseil
municipal de Rouen. This little production seemed too violent to le
Nouvelliste de Rouen, which did not dare to print it; but it will
appear on Wednesday in le Temps, then at Rouen, as a pamphlet.

What a foolish life I have been leading for two and a half months!
How is it that I have not croaked with it? My longest nights have
not been over five hours. What running about! What letters! and what
anger!--repressed--unfortunately! At last, for three days I have
slept all I wanted to, and I am stupefied by it.

I was present with Dumas at the premiere of Roi Carotte. You can not
imagine such rot! It is sillier and emptier than the worst of the
fairy plays of Clairville. The public agreed with me absolutely.

The good Offenbach has had another failure at the Opera-Comique with
Fantasio. Shall one ever get to hating piffle? That would be a fine
step on the right path.

Tourgueneff has been in Paris since the first of December. Every
week we have an engagement to read Saint-Antoine and to dine
together. But something always prevents and we never meet. I am
harassed more than ever by life and am disgusted with everything,
which does not prevent me from being in better health than ever.
Explain that to me.



CCVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 18 January, 1872

You must not be sick, you must not be a grumbler, my dear old
troubadour. You must cough, blow your nose, get well, say that
France is mad, humanity silly, and that we are crude animals; and
you must love yourself, your kind, and your friends above all. I
have some very sad hours. I look at MY FLOWERS, these two little
ones who are always smiling, their charming mother and my wise
hardworking son whom the end of the world will find hunting,
cataloguing, doing his daily task, and gay withal AS PUNCH, in the
RARE moments when he is resting.

He said to me this morning: "Tell Flaubert to come, I will take a
vacation at once. I will play the marionettes for him, I will make
him laugh."

Life in a crowd forbids reflection. You are too much alone. Come
quickly to our house and let us love you.

G. Sand



CCIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Friday, 19 January, 1872

I did not know about all that affair at Rouen and I now understand
your anger. But you are too angry, that is to say too good, and too
good for them. With a BITTER and vindictive man these louts would be
less spiteful and less bold. You have always called them brutes, you
and Bouilhet, now they are avenging themselves on the dead and on
the living. Ah! well, it is indeed that and nothing else.

Yesterday I was preaching the calmness of disdain to you. I see that
this is not the moment, but you are not wicked, strong men are not
cruel! With a bad mob at their heels, these fine men of Rouen would
not have dared what they have dared!

I have the Chansons, tomorrow I shall read your preface, from
beginning to end.

I embrace you.



CCX. TO GEORGE SAND

You will receive very soon: Dernieres Chansons, Aisse and my Lettre
au Conseil municipal de Rouen, which is to appear tomorrow in le
Temps before appearing as a pamphlet.

I have forgotten to tell you something, dear master. I have used
your name. I have COMPROMISED you in citing you among the
illustrious people who have subscribed to the monument for Bouilhet.
I found that it looked well in the sentence. An effect of style
being a sacred thing with me, don't disavow it.

Today I am starting again my metaphysical readings for Saint-
Antoine. Next Saturday, I shall read a hundred and thirty pages of
it, all that is finished, to Tourgueneff. Why won't you be there!

I embrace you.

Your old friend



CCXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 25 January, 1872

You were quite right to put me down and I want to CONTRIBUTE too.
Put me down for the sum you would like and tell me so that I may
have it sent to you.

I have read your preface in le Temps: the end of it is very
beautiful and touching. But I see that this poor friend was, like
you, one who DID NOT GET OVER HIS ANGER, and at your age I should
like to see you less irritated, less worried with the folly of
others. For me, it is lost time, like complaining about being bored
with the rain and the flies. The public which is accused often of
being silly, gets angry and only becomes sillier; for angry or
irritated, one becomes sublime if one is intelligent, idiotic if one
is silly.

After all, perhaps this chronic indignation is a need of your
constitution; it would kill me. I have a great need to be calm so as
to reflect and to think things over. At this moment I am doing THE
USEFUL at the risk of your anathemas. I am trying to simplify a
child's approach to culture, being persuaded that the first study
makes its impression on all the others and that pedagogy teaches us
to look for knots in bulrushes. In short, I am working over A
PRIMER, do not EAT ME ALIVE.

I have ONLY ONE regret about Paris: it is not to be a third with
Tourgueneff when you read your Saint-Antoine. For all the rest,
Paris does not call me at all; my heart has affections there that I
do not wish to hurt, by disagreement with their ideas. It is
impossible not to be tired of this spirit of party or of sect which
makes people no longer French, nor men, nor themselves. They have no
country, they belong to a church. They do what they disapprove of,
so as not to disobey the discipline of the school. I prefer to keep
silent. They would find me cold or stupid; one might as well stay at
home.

You don't tell me of your mother; is she in Paris with her
grandchild? I hope that your silence means that they are well.
Everything has gone wonderfully here this winter; the children are
excellent and give us nothing but joy. After the dismal winter of
'70 to '71, one ought to complain of nothing.

Can one live peaceably, you say, when the human race is so absurd? I
submit, while saying to myself that perhaps I am as absurd as every
one else and that it is time to turn my mind to correcting myself.

I embrace you for myself and for all mine.

G. Sand



CCXII. TO GEORGE SAND

No! dear master! it is not true. Bouilhet never injured the
bourgeois of Rouen; no one was gentler to them, I add even more
cowardly, to tell the truth. As for me, I kept apart from them, that
is all my crime.

I find by chance just today in Nadar's Memoirs du Geant, a paragraph
on me and the people of Rouen which is absolutely exact. Since you
own this book, look at page 100.

If I had kept silent they would have accused me of being a coward. I
protested naively, that is to say brutally. And I did well.

I think that one ought never begin the attack; but when one answers,
one must try to kill cleanly one's enemy. Such is my system.
Frankness is part of loyalty; why should it be less perfect in blame
than in praise?

We are perishing from indulgence, from clemency, from COWISHNESS and
(I return to my eternal refrain) from lack of JUSTICE!

Besides, I have never insulted any one, I have kept to
generalities,--as for M. Decorde, my intentions are for open
warfare;--but enough of that! I spent yesterday, a fine day, with
Tourgueneff to whom I read the hundred and fifteen pages of Saint-
Antoine that are finished. After which, I read to him almost half of
the Dernieres Chansons. What a listener! What a critic! He dazzled
me by the depth and the clearness of his judgment. Ah! if all those
who attempt to judge books had been able to hear, what a lesson!
Nothing escapes him. At the end of a passage of a hundred lines, he
remembers a weak epithet! he gave me two or three suggestions of
exquisite detail for Saint-Antoine.

Do you think me very silly since you believe I am going to blame you
for your primer? I have enough philosophic spirit to know that such
a thing is very serious work.

Method is the highest thing in criticism, since it gives the means
of creating.



CCXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 28 January, 1872

Your preface is splendid and the book [Footnote: Dernieres Chansons,
by Louis Bouilhet.] is divine! Mercy! I have made a line of poetry
without realizing it, God forgive me. Yes, you are right, he was not
second rank, and ranks are not given by decree, above all in an age
when criticism undoes everything and does nothing. All your heart is
in this simple and discreet tale of his life. I see very well now,
why he died so young; he died from having lived too extensively in
the mind. I beg of you not to absorb yourself so much in literature
and learning. Change your home, move about, have mistresses or
wives, whichever you like, and during these phases, must change the
end that one lights.  At my advanced age I throw myself into
torrents of far niente; the most infantile amusements, the silliest,
are enough for me and I return more lucid from my attacks of
imbecility.

It was a great loss to art, that premature death. In ten years there
will not be one single poet. Your preface is beautiful and well
done. Some pages are models, and it is very true that the bourgeois
will read that and find nothing remarkable in it. Ah! if one did not
have the little sanctuary, the interior little shrine, where,
without saying anything to anyone, one takes refuge to contemplate
and to dream the beautiful and the true, one would have to say:
"What is the use?"

I embrace you warmly.

Your old troubadour.



CCXIV. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear good master,

Can you, for le Temps, write on Dernieres Chansons? It would oblige
me greatly. Now you have it.

I was ill all last week. My throat was in a frightful state. But I
have slept a great deal and I am again afloat. I have begun anew my
reading for Saint-Antoine.

It seems to me that Dernieres Chansons could lend itself to a
beautiful article, to a funeral oration on poetry. Poetry will not
perish, but its eclipse will be long and we are entering into the
shades.

Consider if you have a mind for it and answer by a line.



CCXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 17 February

My troubadour, I am thinking of what you asked me to do and I will
do it; but this week I must rest. I played the fool too much at the
carnival with my grandchildren and my great-nephews.

I embrace you for myself and for all my brood.

G. Sand



CCXVI. TO GEORGE SAND

What a long time it is since I have written to you, dear master. I
have so many things to say to you that I don't know where to begin.
Oh! how horrid it is to live so separated when we love each other.

Have you given Paris an eternal adieu? Am I never to see you again
there? Are you coming to Croisset this summer to hear Saint-Antoine?

As for me, I can not go to Nohant, because my time, considering my
straitened purse, is all counted; but I have still I a full month of
readings and researches in Paris. After that I am going away with my
mother: we are in search of a companion for her. It is not easy to
find one. Then, towards Easter I shall be back at Croisset, and
shall start to work again at the manuscript. I am beginning to want
to write.

Just now, I am reading in the evening, Kant's Critique de la raison
pure, translated by Barni, and I am freshening up my Spinoza. During
the day I amuse myself by looking over bestiaries of the middle
ages; looking up in the "authorities" all the most baroque animals.
I am in the midst of fantastic monsters.

When I have almost exhausted the material I shall go to the Museum
to muse before real monsters, and then the researches for the good
Saint-Antoine will be finished.

In your letter before the last one you showed anxiety about my
health; reassure yourself! I have never been more convinced that it
was robust. The life that I have led this winter was enough to kill
three rhinoceroses, but nevertheless I am well. The scabbard must be
solid, for the blade is well sharpened; but everything is converted
into sadness! Any action whatever disgusts me with life! I have
followed your counsels, I have sought distractions! But that amuses
me very little. Decidedly nothing but sacrosanct literature
interests me.

My preface to the Dernieres Chansons has aroused in Madame Colet a
pindaric fury. I have received an anonymous letter from her, in
verse, in which she represents me as a charlatan who beats the drum
on the tomb of his friend, a vulgar wretch who debases himself
before criticism, after having "flattered Caesar"! "Sad example of
the passions," as Prudhomme would say.

A propos of Caesar, I can not believe, no matter what they say, in
his near return. In spite of my pessimism, we have not come to that!
However, if one consulted the God called Universal Suffrage, who
knows?...Ah! we are very low, very low!

I saw Ruy Blas badly played except for Sarah. Melingue is a sleep-
walking drain-man, and the others are as tiresome. As Victor Hugo
had complained in a friendly way that I had not paid him a call, I
thought I ought to do so and I found him ...charming! I repeat the
word, not at all "the great man," not at all a pontiff! This
discovery greatly surprised me and did me worlds of good. For I have
the bump of veneration and I like to love what I admire. That is a
personal allusion to you, dear, kind master.

I have met Madame Viardot whom I found a very curious temperament.
It was Tourgueneff who took me to her house.



CCXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, from the 28 to the 29 February 1872. Night of Wednesday to
Thursday, three o'clock in the morning.

Ah! my dear old friend, what a dreadful twelve days I have spent!
Maurice has been very ill. Continually these terrible sore throats,
which in the beginning seem nothing, but which are complicated with
abscesses and tend to become membranous. He has not been in danger,
but always IN DANGER OF DANGER, and he has had cruel suffering, loss
of voice, he could not swallow; every anguish attached to the
violent sore throat that you know well, since you have just had one.
With him, this trouble continually tends to get worse, and his
mucous membrane has been so often the seat of the same illness that
it lacks energy to react. With that, little or no fever, almost
always on his feet, and the moral depression of a man used to
continual exercise of body and mind, whom the mind and body forbids
to exercise. We have looked after him so well that he is now, I
think, out of the woods, although, this morning, I was afraid again
and sent for Doctor Favre, our USUAL savior.

Throughout the day I have been talking to him, to distract him,
about your researches on monsters; he had his papers brought so as
to hunt among them for what might be useful you; but he has found
only the pure fantasies of his own invention. I found them so
original and so funny that I have encouraged him to send them to
you. They will be of no use to you except to make you burst out
laughing in your hours recreation.

I hope that we are going to come to life again without new relapses.
He is the soul and the life of the house. When he is depressed we
are dead; mother, wife, and children. Aurore says that she would
like to be very ill in her father's place We love each other
passionately, we five, and the SACROSANCT LITERATURE as you call it,
is only secondary in my life. I have always loved some one more than
it and my family more than that some one.

Pray why is your poor little mother so irritable and desperate, in
the very midst of an old age that when I last saw her was still so
green and so gracious? Is her deafness sudden? Did she entirely lack
philosophy and patience before these infirmities? I suffer with you
because I understand what you are suffering.

Another old age which is worse, since it is becoming malicious, is
that of Madame Colet. I used to think that all her hatred was
directed against me, and that seemed to me a bit of madness; for I
had never done or said anything against her, even after that vile
book in which she poured out all her fury WITHOUT cause. What has
she against you now that passion has become ancient history?
Strange! strange! And, a propos of Bouilhet, she hated him then, him
too this poor poet? She is mad.

You may well think that I was not able to write an iota for these
twelve days. I am going, I hope, to start at work as soon as I have
finished my novel which has remained with one foot in the air at the
last pages. It is on the point of being published but has not yet
been finished. I am up every night till dawn; but I have not had a
sufficiently tranquil mind to be distracted from my patient.

Good night, dear good friend of my heart.

Heavens! don't work nor sit up too much, as you also have sore
throats. They are terrible and treacherous illnesses. We all love
you, and we embrace you. Aurore is charming; she learns all that we
want her to, we don't know how, without seeming to notice it.

What kind of a woman do you want as a companion for your mother?
Perhaps I know of such a one. Must she converse and read aloud? It
seems to me that the deafness is a barrier to that. Isn't it a
question of material care and continual diligence? What are the
stipulations and what is the compensation?

Tell me how and why father Hugo did not have one single visit after
Ruy Blas? Did Gautier, Saint-Victor, his faithful ones, neglect him?
Have they quarreled about politics?



CCXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
March, 1872

Dear master,

I have received the fantastic drawings, which have diverted me. Is
there perhaps profound symbolism hidden in Maurice's work? But I did
not find it. ... Revery!

There are two very pretty monsters: (1) an embryo in the form of a
balloon on four feet; (2) a death's head emanating from an
intestinal worm.

We have not found a companion yet. It seems difficult to me, we must
have someone who can read aloud and who is very gentle; we should
also give her some charge of the household. She would not have much
bodily care to give, as my mother would keep her maid.

We must have someone who is kind above all, and perfectly honest.
Religious principles are not objected to! The rest is left to your
perspicacity, dear master! That is all.

I am uneasy about Theo. I think that he is getting strangely old. He
must be very ill, doubtless with heart trouble, don't you think so?
Still another who is preparing to leave me.

No! literature is not what I love most in the world, I explained
myself badly (in my last letter). I spoke to you of distractions and
of nothing more. I am not such a pedant as to prefer phrases to
living beings. The further I go the more my sensibility is
exasperated. But the basis is solid and the thing goes on. And then,
after the Prussian war there is no further great annoyance possible.

And the Critique de la raison pure of the previously mentioned Kant,
translated by Barni, is heavier reading than the Vie Parisienne of
Marcelin; never mind! I shall end by understanding it.

I have almost finished the scenario of the last part of Saint
Antoine. I am in a hurry to start writing. It is too long since I
have written. I am bored with style!

And tell me more about you, dear master! Give me at once news of
Maurice, and tell me if you think that the lady you know would suit
us.

And thereupon I embrace you with both arms.

Your old troubadour always agitated, always as wrathful as Saint
Polycarp.



CCXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
17 March, 1872

No, dear friend, Maurice is almost well again but I have been tired,
worn out with URGENT work: finishing my novel, and correcting a mass
of proof from the beginning. And then unanswered letters, business,
no time to breathe! That is why I have not been able to write the
article on Bouilhet, and as Nanon has begun, as they are publishing
five numbers a week in le Temps, I don't see where I shall publish
that article very soon.

In the Revue des Deux Mondes, they don't want me to write criticism;
whoever is not, or was not of their circle, has no talent, and they
do not give me the right to say the contrary.

There is, to be sure, a new review wide open to me, which is
published by very fine people, but it is more widely read in other
countries than in France, and you will find perhaps that an article
in that would not excite comment. It is the Revue universelle
directed by Amedee Marteau. Discuss that with Charles Edmond. Ask
him if, in spite of the fact that Nanon is being published, he could
find me a little corner in the body of the paper.

As for the companion, you may rest assured that I am looking for
her. The one whom I had in view is not suitable, for she could not
read aloud, and I am not sure enough of the others to propose them.
I thought that your poor mother was too deaf to listen to reading,
and to converse, and that it would be enough for her to have some
one very gentle, and charming, to care for her, and to stay with
her.

That is all, my dear old friend, it is not my fault, I embrace you
with all my heart. For the moment that is the only thing that is
functioning. My brain is too stupefied.

G. Sand



CCXX. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset

Here I am, back again here, dear master, and not very happy; my
mother worries me. Her decline increases from day to day, and almost
from hour to hour. She wanted me to come home although the painters
have not finished their work, and we are very inconveniently housed.
At the end of next week, she will have a companion who will relieve
me in this foolish business of housekeeping.

As for me, I have quite decided not to make the presses groan for
many years, solely not to have "business" to look after, to avoid
all connection with publishers, editors and papers, and above all
not to hear of money.

My incapacity, in that direction, has developed to frightful
proportions. Why should the sight of a bill put me in a rage? It
verges on madness. Aisse has not made money. Dernieres Chansons has
almost gotten me into a lawsuit. The story of la Fontaine is not
ended. I am tired, profoundly tired, of everything.

If only I do not make a failure also of Saint-Antoine. I am going to
start working on it again in a week, when I have finished with Kant
and Hegel. These two great men are helping to stupefy me, and when I
leave them I fall with eagerness upon my old and thrice great
Spinoza. What genius, how fine a work the Ethics is!



CCXXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
9 April, 1872

I am with you all day and all night, and at every instant, my poor
dear friend. I am thinking of all the sorrow that you are in the
midst of. I would like to be near you. The misfortune of being tied
here distresses me. I would like a word so as to know if you have
the courage that you need. The end of that noble and dear life has
been sad and long; for from the day that she became feeble, she
declined and you could not distract her and console her. Now, alas!
the incessant and cruel task is ended, as the things of this world
end, anguish after struggle! What a bitter achievement of rest! and
you are going to miss this anxiety, I am sure of that. I know the
sort of dismay that follows the combat with death.

In short, my poor child, I can only open a maternal heart to you
which will replace nothing, but which is suffering with yours, and
very keenly in each one of your troubles.

G. Sand



CCXXII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 14 April, 1872

My daughter-in-law has been staying several days with our friends,
at Nimes, to stop a bad case of WHOOPING-COUGH that Gabrielle was
suffering with, to separate her from Aurore, from fear of contagion,
and to recuperate, for she has not been well for some time. As for
me, I am well again. That little illness and this departure suddenly
resolved upon and accomplished, have upset my plans somewhat. I had
to look after Aurore so that she might be reconciled to it, and I
have not had a moment to answer you. I am wondering too if you don't
like it better to be left to yourself these first few days. But I
beguile the need I feel of being near you at this sad time, by
telling you over and over again, my poor, dear friend, how much I
love you. Perhaps, too, your family has taken you to Rouen or to
Dieppe, so as not to let you go back at once into that sad house. I
don't know anything about your plans, in case those which you made
to absorb yourself in work are changed. If you have any inclination
to travel, and the sinews of war are lacking, I have ready for you a
few sous that I have just earned, and I put them at your disposal.
Don't feel constrained with me any more than I would with you, dear
child. They are going to pay me for my novel in five or six days at
the office of le Temps; you need only to write me a line and I shall
see that you get it in Paris. A word when you can, I embrace you,
and so does Maurice, very tenderly.



CCXXIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Tuesday, 16 April, 1872

Dear good master,

I should have answered at once your first, very kind letter.  But I
was too sad. I lacked physical strength.

At last, today, I am beginning to hear the birds singing and to see
the leaves growing green. The sun irritates me no longer, which is a
good sign. If I could feel like working again I should be all right.

Your second letter (that of yesterday) moved me to tears! You are so
good! What a splendid creature you are! I do not need money now,
thank you. But if I did need any, I should certainly ask you for it.

My mother has left Croisset to Caroline with the condition that I
should keep my apartments there. So, until the estate is completely
settled, I stay here. Before deciding on the future, I must know
what I have to live on, after that we shall see.

Shall I have the strength to live absolutely alone in solitude?  I
doubt it, I am growing old. Caroline cannot live here now. She has
two dwellings already, and the house at Croisset is expensive. I
think I shall give up my Paris lodging. Nothing calls me to Paris
any longer. All my friends are dead, and the last one, poor Theo, is
not for long, I fear. Ah! it is hard to grow a new skin at fifty
years of age!

I realized, during the last two weeks, that my poor dear, good
mother was the being that I have loved the most! It is as if someone
had torn out a part of my vitals.



CCXXIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 28 April, 1872

I hold my poor Aurore, who has a terrible case of whooping-cough,
day and night in my arms. I have an important piece of work that I
must finish, and which I shall finish in spite of everything. If I
have not already done the article on Bouilhet, rest assured it is
because it is IMPOSSIBLE. I shall do it at the same time as that on
l'Annee terrible. I shall go to Paris between the 20th and 25th of
May, at the latest. Perhaps sooner, if Maurice takes Aurore to Nimes
where Lina and the littlest one are. I shall write to you, you must
come to see me in Paris, or I will go to see you.

I thirst too to embrace you, to console you--no, but to tell you
that your sorrows are mine. Good-bye till then, a line to tell me if
your affairs are getting settled, and if you are coming out on top.

Your old G. Sand



CCXXV. TO GEORGE SAND

What good news, dear master! In a month and even before a month, I
shall see you at last!

Try not to be too hurried in Paris, so that we may have the time to
talk. What would be very nice, would be, if you came back here with
me to spend several days. We should be quieter than there; "my poor
old mother" loved you very much, would be sweet to see you in her
house, when she has been gone only such a short time.

I have started work again, for existence is only tolerable when one
forgets one's miserable self.

It will be a long time before I know what I have to live on. For all
the fortune that is left to us is in meadowland, and in order to
divide it, we have to sell it all.

Whatever happens, I shall keep my apartments at Croisset. That will
be my refuge, and perhaps even my only habitation. Paris hardly
attracts me any longer. In a little while I shall have no more
friends there. The human being (the eternal feminine included)
amuses me less and less.

Do you know that my poor Theo is very ill? He is dying from boredom
and misery. No one speaks his language anymore! We are like fossils
who subsist astray in a new world.



CCXXVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 18 May, 1872

Dear friend of my heart, your inability does not disturb me at all,
on the contrary. I have the grippe and the prostration that follows
it. I cannot go to Paris for a week yet, and shall be there during
the first part of June. My little ones are both in the sheepfold. I
have taken good care of and cured the eldest, who is strong. The
other is very tired, and the trip did not prevent the whooping-
cough. For my part, I have worked very hard in caring for my dear
one, and as soon as my task was over, as soon as I saw my dear world
reunited and well again, I collapsed. It will be nothing, but I have
not the strength to write. I embrace you, and I count on seeing you
soon.

G. Sand



CCXXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Paris, Monday, 3 June, 1872, Rue Gay Lussac, 5

I am in Paris, and for all this week, in the horror of personal
business. But next week will you come? I should like to go to see
you in Croisset, but I do not know if I can. I have taken Aurore's
whooping-cough, and, at my age, it is severe. I am, however, better,
but hardly able to go about. Write me a line, so I can reserve the
hours that you can give me. I embrace you, as I love you, with a
full heart.

G. Sand



CCXXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
1872

The hours that I could give you, dear Master! Why, all the hours,
now, by and by, and forever.

I am planning to go to Paris at the end of next week, the 14th or
the 16th. Shall you be there still? If not, I shall go earlier.

But I should like it much better if you came here. We should be
quieter, without callers or intruders! More than ever, I should like
to have you now in my poor Croisset.

It seems to me that we have enough to talk about without stopping
for twenty-four hours. Then I would read you Saint-Antoine, which
lacks only about fifteen pages of being finished. However, don't
come if your cough continues. I should be afraid that the dampness
would hurt you.

The mayor of Vendome has asked me "to honor with my presence" the
dedication of the statue of Ronsard, which occurs the 23rd of this
month: I shall go. And I should even like to deliver an address
there which would be a protest against the universal modern flap-
doodle. The occasion is good. But for the production of a really
appropriate little gem, I lack the snap and vivacity.

Hoping to see you soon, dear master, your old troubadour who
embraces you.



CCXXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
7 June, 1872

Dear friend,

Your old troubadour has such a bad cough that a little bit more
would be the last straw. On the other hand, they cannot get on
without me at our house, and I cannot stay longer than next week,
that is to say, the 15th or the 16th. If you could come next
Thursday, the 13th, I should reserve the 13th, the 14th, even the
15th, to be with you at my house for the day for dinner, for the
evening, in short, just as if we were in the country, where we could
read and converse. I would be supposed to have gone away.

A word at once, I embrace you as I love you.

G. Sand



CCXXX. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear master,

Have you promised your support to the candidacy of Duquesnel? if
not, I should like to beg you to use to the utmost your influence to
support my friend, Raymond Deslandes, as if he were

Your old troubadour,

G. Flaubert

Thursday, three o'clock, 13 June, 1872.

Answer me categorically, so that we may know what you will do.



CCXXXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
..Nohant, 5 July, 1872

I must write to you today. Sixty-eight years old. Perfect health in
spite of the cough, which lets me sleep now that I am plunging daily
in a furious little torrent, cold as ice. It boils around the
stones, the flowers, the great grasses in a delicious shade. It is
an ideal place to bathe.

We have had some terrible storms: lightning struck in our garden;
and our stream, the Indre, has become like a torrent in the
Pyrenees. It is not unpleasant. What a fine summer! The grain is
seven feet high, the wheat fields are sheets of flowers. The peasant
thinks that there are too many; but I let him talk, it is so lovely!
I go on foot to the stream, I jump, all boiling hot, into the icy
water. The doctor says that is madness. I let him talk, too; I am
curing myself while his patients look after themselves and croak. I
am like the grass of the fields: water and sun, that is all I need.

Are you off for the Pyrenees? Ah! I envy you, I love them so! I have
taken frantic trips there; but I don't know Luchon. Is it lovely,
too? You won't go there without seeing the Cirque of Gavarnie, and
the road that leads there, will you? And Cauterets and the lake of
Gaube? And the route of Saint-Sauveur? Heavens! How lucky one is to
travel and to see the mountains, the flowers, the cliffs! Does all
that bore you?

Do you remember the editors, the theatrical managers, the readers
and the public when you are running about the country! As for me, I
forget everything as I do when Pauline Viardot is singing.

The other day we discovered, about three leagues from here, a
wilderness, an absolute wilderness of woods in a great expanse of
country, where not one hut could be seen, not a human being, not a
sheep, not a fowl, nothing but flowers, butterflies and birds all
day. But where will my letter find you? I shall wait to send it to
you till you give me an address!



CCXXXII. TO GEORGE SAND
Bagneres de Luchon, 12th July, 1872

I have been here since Sunday evening, dear master, and no happier
than at Croisset, even a little less so, for I am very idle. They
make so much noise in the house where we are that it is impossible
to work. Moreover, the sight of the  bourgeois who surround us is
unendurable. I am not made for travelling. The least inconvenience
disturbs me. Your old troubadour is very old, decidedly! Doctor
Lambron, the  physician of this place, attributes my nervous
tendencies to the excessive use of tobacco. To be agreeable I am
going to smoke less; but I doubt very much if my virtue will cure
me!

I have just read Dickens's Pickwick. Do you know that? There are
superb passages in it; but what defective composition!  All English
writers are the same; Walter Scott excepted, all lack a plot. That
is unendurable for us Latins.

Mister ***** is certainly nominated, as it seems. All the people who
have had to do with the Odeon, beginning with you, dear master, will
repent of the support that they have given him. As for me, who,
thank Heaven, have no more connection with that establishment, I
don't give a whoop.

As I am going to begin a book which will exact much reading,  and
since I don't want to ruin myself in books, do you know of any
dealer in Paris who would rent me all the books that I designated?

What are you doing now? We saw each other so little and so
inconveniently the last time.

This letter is stupid. But they are making such a noise over my head
that it is not clear (my head).

In the midst of my bewilderment, I embrace you and yours also. Your
old blockhead who loves you.



CCXXXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 19 July, 1872

Dear old troubadour,

We too are going away, but without knowing yet where we are going;
it doesn't make any difference to me. I wanted to take my brood to
Switzerland; they would rather go in the opposite direction, to the
Ocean; the Ocean will do! If only we travel and bathe, I shall be
out of my mind with joy.  Decidedly our two old troubadourships are
two opposites. What bores you, amuses me; I love movement and noise,
and even the tiresome things about travelling find favor in my eyes,
provided they are a part of travelling. I am much more sensible to
what disturbs the calm of sedentary life, than to that which is a
normal and necessary disturbance in the life of motion.

I am absolutely like my grandchildren, who are intoxicated
beforehand without knowing why. But it is curious to see how
children, while loving the change, want to take with them their
surroundings, their accustomed playthings, when they go out into the
world. Aurore is packing her dolls' trunk, and Gabrielle, who likes
animals better, intends to take her rabbits, her little dog, and a
little pig that she is taking care of until she eats it. SUCH IS
LIFE [sic].

I believe that, in spite of your bad temper, this trip will do you
good. It will make you rest your brain, and if you have to smoke
less, so much the better! Health above all. I hope that your niece
will make you move around a bit; she is your child; she ought to
have some authority over you, or the world would be turned upside
down.

I cannot refer you to the bookshop that you need for borrowing
books. I send for such things to Mario Proth, and I don't know where
he finds them. When you get back to Paris, tell him from me to
inform you. He is a devoted fellow, as obliging as possible. He
lives at 2 rue Visconti. It occurs to me that Charles Edmond, too,
might give you very good information; Troubat, [Footnote: Sainte-
Beuve's secretary.] also.

You are surprised that spoken words are not contracts; you are very
simple; in business nothing holds except written documents. We are
Don Quixotes, my old troubadour; we must resign ourselves to being
trimmed by the innkeepers. Life is like that, and he who does not
want to be deceived must go to live in a desert. It is not living to
keep away from all the evil of this nether-world. One must swallow
the bitter with the sweet.

As to your Saint-Antoine, if you let me, I shall see about finding
you a publisher or a review on my next trip to Paris, but we ought
to talk about it together and you ought to read it to me. Why
shouldn't you come to us in September? I shall be at home until
winter.

You ask me what I am doing now: I have done, since I left Paris, an
article on Mademoiselle de Flaugergues, which will appear in
l'Opinion nationale with a work by her; an article for le Temps on
Victor Hugo, Bouilhet, Leconte de Lisle and Pauline Viardot. I hope
that you will be pleased with what I said about your friend; I have
done a second fantastic tale for the Revue des Deux Mondes, a tale
for children. I have written about a hundred letters, for the most
part to make up for the folly or to soften the misery of imbeciles
of my acquaintance. Idleness is the plague of this age, and life is
passed in working for those who do not work. I do not complain. I am
well! every day I plunge into the Indre and into its icy cascades,
my sixty-eight years and my whooping-cough. When I am no longer
useful nor agreeable to others, I want to go away quietly without
saying OUF! or at least, not saying anything except that against
poor mankind, which is not worth much, but of which I am part, not
being worth perhaps very much myself.

I love you and I embrace you. My family does too, Plauchut included.
He is going to travel with us.

When we are SOMEWHERE FOR SEVERAL DAYS I shall write to you for
news.

G. Sand



CCXXXIV. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Thursday

Dear master,

In the letter I received from you at Luchon a month ago, you told me
that you were packing up, and then that was all. No more news! I
have permitted myself to assume, as the good Brantome would say,
that you were at Cabourg! When do you return? Where do you go then?
To Paris or to Nohant? A question.

As for me, I am not leaving Croisset. From the 1st to the 20th or
25th of September I shall have to go about a bit on business. I
shall go to Paris. Write then to rue Murillo.

I should like very much to see you: (1) to see you; (2) to read you
Saint-Antoine, then to talk to you about another more important
book, etc., and to talk about a hundred other things privately.



CCXXXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 31 August, 1872

My old troubadour,

Here we are back again at home, after a month passed, just as you
said, at Cabourg, where chance more than intention placed us. We all
took wonderful sea baths, Plauchut, too. We often talked of you with
Madame Pasca who was our neighbor at table, and had the room next
us. We have returned in splendid health, and we are glad to see our
old Nohant again, after having been glad to leave it for a little
change of air.

I have resumed my usual work, and I continue my river baths, but no
one will accompany me, it is too cold. As for me, I found fault with
the sea for being too warm. Who would think that, with my appearance
and my tranquil old age, I would still love EXCESS? My dominant
passion on the whole is my Aurore. My life depends on hers. She was
so lovely on the trip, so gay, so appreciative of the amusements
that we gave her, so attentive to what she saw, and curious about
everything with so much intelligence, that she is real and
sympathetic company at every hour. Ah! how UNLITERARY I am! Scorn me
but still love me.

I don't know if I shall find you in Paris when I go there for my
play. I have not arranged with the Odeon for the date of its
performance. I am waiting for Duquesnel for the final reading.--And
then I expect Pauline Viardot about the 20th of September, and I
hope Tourgueneff too, won't you come also? it would be so nice and
so complete!

In this hope which I will not give up, I love you and I embrace you
with all my soul, and my children join me in loving you and
summoning you.

G. Sand



CCXXXVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Paris
Nohant, 25 October, 1872

Your letters fall on me like a rain that refreshes, and develops at
once all that is germinating in the soil; they make me want to
answer your reasons, because your reasons are powerful and inspire a
reply.

I do not assume that my replies will be strong too; they are
sincere, they issue from the roots of my being, like the plants
aforesaid. That is why I have just written a paper on the subject
that you raise, addressing myself this time TO A WOMAN FRIEND, who
has written me also in your vein, but less well than you, of course,
and a little from an aristocratically intellectual point of view, to
which she has not ALL THE RIGHTS SHE DESIRES.

My roots, one can't extirpate them, and I am astonished that you ask
me to make tulips come from them when they can answer you by
producing only potatoes. Since the beginning of my intellectual
blooming, when, studying quite alone at the bedside of my paralyzed
grandmother, or in the fields at the times when I entrusted her to
Deschartres, I asked myself the most elementary questions about
society; I was no more advanced at seventeen than a child of six,
not as much! thanks to Deschartres, my father's teacher, who was a
contradiction from his head to his feet, much learning and little
sense; thanks to the convent, into which they stuck me, God knows
why, as they believed in nothing; thanks also to a purely
Restoration surrounding in which my grandmother, a philosopher, but
dying, breathed her last without resisting further the monarchical
current.

Then I read Chateaubriand, and Rousseau; I passed from the Gospels
to the Contrat social. I read the history of the Revolution written
by the pious, the history of France, written by philosophers; and,
one fine day, I made all that agree like light proceeding from two
lamps, and I had PRINCIPLES. Don't laugh, very candid, childish
principles which have remained with me through all, through Lelia
and the romantic epoch, through love and doubt, enthusiasm and
disenchantments. To love, to make sacrifices, only to reconsider
when the sacrifice is harmful to those who are the object of it, and
to sacrifice oneself again in the hope of serving a real cause,
love.

I am not speaking here of personal passion, but of love of race, of
the widening sentiment of self-love, of the horror of THE ISOLATED
MOI. And that ideal of JUSTICE of which you speak, I have never seen
it apart from love, since the first law on which the existence of a
natural society depends, is that we shall serve each other mutually,
like the bees and the ants. This concurrence of all to the same end,
we have agreed to call instinct among beasts, and it does not
matter, but among men, the instinct is love; he who withdraws
himself from love, withdraws himself from truth, from justice.

I have experienced revolutions, and I have seen the principal actors
near to; I have seen the depth of their souls, I should say the
bottom of their bag: NO PRINCIPLES! and no real intelligence, no
force, nor endurance. Nothing but means and a personal end. Only one
had principles, not all of them good, but in comparison with their
integrity, he counted his personality for nothing: Barbes.

Among artists and literary men, I have found no depth. You are the
only one with whom I have been able to exchange other ideas than
those of the profession. I don't know if you were at Magny's one day
when I said to them that they were all GENTLEMEN. They said that one
should not write for ignoramuses. They spurned me because I wanted
to write only for them, as they are the only ones who need anything.
The masters are provided for, are rich, satisfied. Imbeciles lack
everything, I am sorry for them. Loving and pitying are not to be
separated. And there you have the uncomplicated mechanism of my
thought.

I have the passion for goodness and not at all for prejudiced
sentimentality. I spit with all my might upon him who pretends to
hold my principles and acts contrary to them. I do not pity the
incendiary and the assassin who fall under the hand of the law; I do
pity profoundly the class which a brutal, degenerate life without
upward trend and without aid, brings to the point of producing such
monsters. I pity humanity, I wish it were good, because I cannot
separate myself from it; because it is myself; because the evil it
does strikes me to the heart; because its shame makes me blush;
because its crimes gnaw at my vitals, because I cannot understand
paradise in heaven nor on earth for myself alone.

You ought to understand me, you who are goodness from head to foot.

Are you still in Paris? It has been such fine weather that I have
been tempted to go there to embrace you, but I don't dare to spend
the money, however little it may be, when there is so much poverty.
I am miserly because I know that I am extravagant when I forget, and
I continually forget. And then I have so much to do!...I don't know
anything and I don't learn anything, for I am always forced to learn
it over again. I do very much need, however, to see you again, for a
little bit; it is a part of myself which I miss.

My Aurore keeps me very busy. She understands too quickly and we
have to take her at a hard gallop. To understand fascinates her, to
know repels her. She is as lazy as monsieur, her father, was. He has
gotten over it so well that I am not impatient. She promises me to
write you a letter soon. You see that she does not forget you.
Titite's Punch has lost his head, literally, because he has been so
embraced and caressed. He is loved as much without his head; what an
example of fidelity in misfortune! His stomach has become a
receptacle where playthings are put.

Maurice is deep in his archeological studies, Lina is always
adorable, and all goes well except that the maids are not clean.
What a road the creatures have still to travel who do not keep
themselves clean!

I embrace you. Tell me how you are getting on with Aisse, the Odeon
and all that stuff you are busy about. I love you; that is the end
of all my discourses.

G. Sand



CCXXXVII. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear master,

In your last letter, among the nice things that you say to me, you
praise me for not being "haughty"; one is not haughty with what is
high. Therefore, in this aspect, you cannot know me. I object.

Although I consider myself a good man, I am not always an agreeable
gentleman, witness what happened to me Thursday last. After having
lunched with a lady whom I had called "imbecile," I went to call on
another whom I had said was "ninny"; such is my ancient French
gallantry. The first one had bored me to death with her
spiritualistic discourses and her pretensions to ideality; the
second outraged me by telling me that Renan was a rascal. Observe
that she confessed to me that she had not read his books. There are
some subjects about which I lose patience, and, when a friend is
slandered before my very face, the savage in my blood returns, I see
red. Nothing more foolish! for it serves no purpose and hurts me
frightfully.

This vice, by the way, BETRAYING ONE'S FRIENDS IN PUBLIC, seems to
me to be taking gigantic proportions!



CCXXXVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 26 October, 1872

Dear friend,

Here is another chagrin for you; a sorrow foreseen, but none the
less distressing. Poor Theo! I pity him deeply, not because he is
dead, but because he has not been really living for twenty years;
and if he had consented to live, to exist, to act, to forget a bit
his intellectual personality so as to conserve his material
personality, he could have lived a long time yet, and have renewed
his resources which he was too much inclined to make a sterile
treasure. They say that he suffered greatly from hardship during the
siege. I understand it, but afterward? why and how?

I am worried at not having had news from you for a long time. Are
you at Croisset? You must have been in Paris for the funeral of this
poor friend. What cruel and repeated separations! I am angry with
you for becoming savage and discontented with life. It seems to me
that you regard happiness too much as a possible thing, and that the
absence of happiness which is our chronic state, angers you and
astonishes you too much. You shun friends, you plunge into work, and
reckon ass lost the time you might employ in loving or in being
loved. Why didn't you come to us with Madame Viardot and
Tourgueneff? You like them, you admire them, you know that you are
adored here, and you run away to be alone. Well, how about getting
married? Being alone is odious, it is deadly, and it is cruel also
for those who love you. All your letters are unhappy and grip my
heart. Haven't you any woman whom you love or by whom you would be
loved with pleasure? Take her to live with you. Isn't there anywhere
a little urchin whose father you can believe you are? Bring him up.
Make yourself his slave, forget yourself in him.

What do I know? To live in oneself is bad. There is intellectual
pleasure only in the possibility of returning to it when one has
been out for a long time; but to live always in this Moi which is
the most tyrannical, the most exacting, the most fantastic of
companions, no, one must not.--I beg you, listen to me! You are
shutting up an exuberant nature in a jail, you are making out of a
tender and indulgent heart, a deliberate misanthrope,--and you will
not make a success of it. In short, I am worried about you, and I am
saying perhaps some foolishness to you; but we live in cruel times
and we must not undergo them with curses. We must rise above them
with pity. That's it! I love you, write to me.

I shall not go to Paris until after a month's time to put on
Mademoiselle La Quintinie. Where shall you be?



CCXXXIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Monday night, 28 October, 1872

You have guessed rightly, dear master, that I had an increase of
sorrow, and you have written me a very tender, good letter, thanks;
I embrace you even more warmly than usual.

Although expected, the death of poor Theo has distressed me. He is
the last of my intimates to go. He closes the list. Whom shall I see
now when I go to Paris? With whom shall I talk of what interests me?
I know some thinkers (at least people who are called so), but an
artist, where is there any? For my part, I tell you he died from the
"putrescence of modern times." That is his word, and he repeated it
to me this winter several times: "I am dying of the Commune," etc.

The 4th of September has inaugurated an order of things in which
people like him have nothing more in the world to do. One must not
demand apples of orange trees. Artisans in luxury are useless in a
society dominated by plebeians. How I regret him! He and Bouilhet
have left an absolute void in me, and nothing can take their place.
Besides he was always so good, and no matter what they say, so
simple. People will recognize later (if they ever return seriously
to literature), that he was a great poet. Meanwhile he is an
absolutely unknown author. So indeed is Pierre Corneille.

He hated two things: the hate of the Philistines in his youth, that
gave him his talent; the hate of the blackguards in his riper years,
this last killed him. He died of suppressed fury, of wrath at not
being able to say what he thought. He was OPPRESSED by Girardin, by
Fould, by Dalloz, and by the first Republic. I tell you that,
because _I_ HAVE SEEN abominable things and I am the only man
perhaps to whom he made absolute confidences. He lacked what was the
most important thing in life for him and for others: CHARACTER. That
he failed of the Academy was to him a dreadful chagrin. What
weakness! and how little he must have esteemed himself! To seek an
honor no matter what, seems to me, besides, an act of
incomprehensible modesty.

I was not at his funeral owing to the mistake of Catulle Mendes, who
sent me a telegram too late. There was a crowd. A lot of scoundrels
and buffoons came to advertise themselves as usual, and today,
Monday, the day of the theatrical paper, there must be bits in the
bulletins, THAT WILL MAKE COPY. To resume, I do not pity him, I ENVY
HIM. For, frankly, life is not amusing.

No, I don't think that HAPPINESS IS POSSIBLE, but certainly
tranquillity. That is why I get away from what irritates me. A trip
to Paris is for me now, a great business. As soon as I shake the
vessel, the dregs mount and permeate all. The least conversation
with anyone at all exasperates me because I find everyone idiotic.
My feeling of justice is continually revolted. They talk ONLY of
politics and in what a fashion! Where is there a sign of an idea?
What can one get hold of? What shall one get excited about?

I don't think, however, that I am a monster of egoism. My Moi
scatters itself in books so that I pass whole days without noticing
it. I have bad moments, it is true, but I pull myself together by
this reflection: "No one at least bothers me." After that, I regain
my balance. So I think that I am going on in my natural path; am I
right?

As for living with a woman, marrying as you advise me to do that is
a prospect that I find fantastic. Why? I don't know. But it is so.
Explain the riddle. The feminine being has never been included in my
life; and then, I am not rich enough, and then, and then--...I am
too old, and too decent to inflict forever my person on another.
There is in me an element of the ecclesiastical that people don't
know. We shall talk about that better than we can write of it.

I shall see you in Paris in December, but in Paris one is disturbed
by others. I wish you three hundred performances for Mademoiselle La
Quintinie. But you will have a lot of bother with the Odeon. It is
an institution where I suffered horribly last winter. Every time
that I attempted to do anything they dished me. So, enough! enough!
"Hide thy life," maxim of Epictetus. My whole ambition now is to
flee from bother, and I am sure by that means never to cause any to
others, that is much.

I am working like a madman, I am reading medicine, metaphysics,
politics, everything. For I have undertaken a work of great scope,
which will require a lot of time, a prospect that pleases me.

Ever since a month ago, I have been expecting Tourgueneff from week
to week. The gout is delaying him still.



CCXL. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 22 November, 1872

I don't think that I shall go to Paris before February. My play is
postponed on account of the difficulty of finding the chief actor. I
am content about it, for the idea of leaving Nohant, my occupations,
and the walks that are so lovely in this weather, didn't look good
to me at all; what a warm autumn and how good for old people! Two
hours distant from here, we have a real wilderness, where, the next
day after a rain, it is as dry as in a room, and where there are
still flowers for me, and insects for Maurice. The little children
run like rabbits in the heather which is higher than they are.
Heavens! how good it is to be alive when all one loves is living and
scurrying around one. You are the only BLACK SPOT in my heart-life,
because you are sad and don't want to look at the sun. As for those
about whom I don't care, I don't care either about the evils or the
follies they can commit against me or against themselves. They will
pass as the rain passes. The eternal thing is the feeling of beauty
in a good heart. You have both, confound it! you have no right not
to be happy.--Perhaps you ought to have had in your life the
INCLUSION OF THE FEMININE SENTIMENT which you say you have defied.--
I know that the feminine is worth nothing; but, perhaps, in order to
be happy, one must have been unhappy.

I have been, and I know enough about it; but I forget so well. Well,
sad or gay, I love you and I am still waiting for you, although you
never speak of coming to see us, and you cast aside the opportunity
emphatically; we love you here just the same, we are not literary
enough for you here, I know that, but we love, and that gives life
occupation.

Is Saint-Antoine finished, that you are talking of a work of great
scope? or is it Saint-Antoine that is going to spread its wings over
the entire universe? It could, the subject is immense.  I embrace
you, shall I say again, my old troubadour, since you have resolved
to turn into an old Benedictine? I shall remain a troubadour,
naturally.

G. Sand

I am sending you two novels for your collection of my writings: you
are not OBLIGED to read them immediately, if you are deep in serious
things.



CCXLI. TO GEORGE SAND
Monday evening, eleven o'clock, 25 November, 1872

The postman just now, at five o'clock, has brought your two volumes
to me. I am going to begin Nanon at once, for I am very curious
about it.

Don't worry any more about your old troubadour (who is becoming a
silly animal, frankly), but I hope to recover. I have gone through,
several times, melancholy periods, and I have come out all right.
Everything wears out, boredom with the rest.

I expressed myself badly: I did not mean that I scorned "the
feminine sentiment." But that woman, materially speaking, had never
been one of my habits, which is quite different. I have LOVED more
than anyone, a presumptuous phrase which means "quite like others,"
and perhaps even more than average person. Every affection is known
to me, "the storms of the heart" have "poured out their rain" on me.
And then chance, force of circumstances, causes solitude to increase
little by little around me, and now I am alone, absolutely alone.

I have not sufficient income to take unto myself a wife, nor even to
live in Paris for six months of the year: so it is impossible for me
to change my way of living.

Do you mean to say that I did not tell you that Saint-Antoine had
been finished since last June? What I am dreaming of just now, is
something of greater scope, which will aim to be comic. It would
take too long to explain to you with a pen. We shall talk of it when
we meet.

Adieu, dear good, adorable master, yours with his best affection,

Your old friend.

Always as indignant as Saint Polycarp.

Do you know, in all history, including that of the Botocudos,
anything more imbecile than the Right of the National Assembly?
These gentlemen who do not want the simple and frivolous word
Republic, who find Thiers too advanced!!! O profoundness! problem,
revery!



CCXLII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 27 November, 1872

Maurice is quite happy and very proud of the letter you wrote him;
there is no one who could give him as much pleasure and whose
encouragement counts more with him. I thank you too, for my part;
for I agree with him.

What! you have finished Saint-Antoine? Well, should I find a
publisher, since you are not doing so? You cannot keep it in your
portfolio. You don't like Levy, but there are others; say the word,
and I will act as if it were for myself.

You promise me to get well later, but in the mean time you don't
want to do anything to jolt yourself. Come, then, to read Saint-
Antoine to me, and we will talk of publishing it. What is coming
here from Croisset, for a man? If you won't come when we are gay and
having a holiday, come while it is quiet an I am alone.  All the
family embraces you.

Your old troubadour

G. Sand



CCXLIII. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear master,

Here it is a night and a day that I have spent with you. I had
finished Nanon at four o'clock in the morning, and Francia at three
o'clock in the afternoon. All of it is still dancing around in my
head. I am going to try to gather my ideas together to talk about
these excellent books to you. They have done me good. So thank you,
dear, good master. Yes, they were like a great whiff of air, and,
after having been moved, I feel refreshed.

In Nanon, in the first place I was charmed with the style, with a
thousand simple and strong things which are included in the web of
the work, and which make it what it is; for instance: "as the burden
seemed to me enormous, the beast seemed to me beautiful." But I did
not pay any attention to any thing, I was carried away, like the
commonest reader. (I don't think that the common reader could admire
it as much as I do.) The life of the monks, the first relations
between Emilien and Nanon, the fear caused by the brigands and the
imprisonment of Pere Fructueux which could be commonplace and which
it is not at all. What a fine page is 113! and how difficult it was
to stay within bounds! "Beginning with this day, I felt happiness in
everything, and, as it were, a joy to be in the world."

La Roche aux Fades is an exquisite idyll. One would like to share
the life of those three fine people.

I think that the interest slackens a little when Nanon gets the idea
of becoming rich. She becomes too strongminded, too intelligent! I
don't like the episode of the robbers either. The reappearance of
Emilien with his arm cut off, stirred me again, and I shed a tear at
the last page over the portrait of the Marquise de Francqueville in
her old age.

I submit to you the following queries: Emilien seems to me very much
up in political philosophy; at that period did people see as far
ahead as he? The same objection applies to the prior, whom I think
otherwise charming, in the middle of the book especially. But how
well all that is brought in, how well sustained, how fascinating,
how charming! What a creature you are! What power you have!

I give you on your two cheeks, two little nurse's kisses, and I pass
to Francia! Quite another style, but none the less good. And in the
first place I admire enormously your Dodore. This is the first time
that anyone has made a Paris gamin real; he is not too generous, nor
too intemperate, nor too much of a vaudevillist. The dialogue with
his sister, when he consents to her becoming a kept woman, is a
feat. Your Madame de Thievre, with her shawl which she slips up and
down over her fat shoulders, isn't she decidedly of the Restoration!
And the uncle who wants to confiscate his nephew's grisette! And
Antoine, the good fat tinsmith so polite at the theatre! The Russian
is a simple-minded, natural man, a character that is not easy to do.

When I saw Francia plunge the poignard into his heart, I frowned
first, fearing that it might be a classic vengeance that would spoil
the charming character of that good girl. But not at all! I was
mistaken, that unconscious murder completed your heroine.

What strikes me the most in the book is that it is very intelligent
and exact. One is completely in the period.

I thank you from the bottom of my heart for this twofold reading. It
has relaxed me. Everything then is not dead. There is still
something beautiful and good in the world.



CCXLIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 29 November, 1872

You spoil me! I did not dare to send you the novels, which were
wrapped up addressed to you for a week. I was afraid of interrupting
your train of thought and of boring you. You stopped everything to
read Maurice first, and then me. We should be remorseful if we were
not egoists, very happy to have a reader who is worth ten thousand
others! That helps a great deal; for Maurice and I work in a desert,
never knowing, except from each other, if a thing is a success or a
mess, exchanging our criticisms, and never having relations with
accredited JUDGES.

Michel never tells us until after a year or two if a book has SOLD.
As for Buloz, if it is with him we have to do, he tells us
invariably that the thing is bad or poor. It is only Charles Edmond
who encourages us by asking us for copy. We write without
consideration for the public; that is perhaps not a bad idea, but we
carry it too far. And praise from you gives us the courage which
does not depart from us, but which is often a sad courage, while you
make it sparkling and gay, and healthful for us to breathe.

I was right then in not throwing Nanon into the fire, as I was ready
to do, when Charles Edmond came to tell me that it was very well
done, and that he wanted it for his paper. I thank you then, and I
send you back your good kisses, for Francia especially, which Buloz
only put in with a sour face and for lack of something better: you
see that I am not spoiled, but I never get angry at all that and I
don't talk about it. That is how it is, and it is very simple. As
soon as literature is a merchandise, the salesman who exploits it,
appreciates only the client who buys it, and if the client
depreciates the object, the salesman declares to the author that his
merchandise is not pleasing. The republic of letters is only a
market in which one sells books. Not making concession to the
publisher is our only virtue; let us keep that and let us live in
peace, even with him when he is peevish, and let us recognize, too,
that he is not the guilty one. He would have taste if the public had
it.

Now I've emptied my bag, and don't let us talk of it again except to
advise about Saint-Antoine, meanwhile telling ourselves that the
editors will be brutes. Levy, however, is not, but you are angry
with him. I should like to talk of all that with you; will you come?
or wait until my trip to Paris? But when shall I go? I don't know.

I am a little afraid of bronchitis in the winter, and I do not leave
home unless I absolutely have to for business reasons.

I don't think that they will play Mademoiselle La Quintinie. The
censors have declared that it is a MASTERPIECE OF THE MOST ELEVATED
AND HEALTHIEST MORALITY, but that they could not TAKE UPON
THEMSELVES to authorize the performance. IT WILL HAVE TO BE TAKEN TO
HIGHER AUTHORITIES, that is to say, to the minister who will send it
to General Ladmirault; it is enough to make you die laughing. But I
don't agree to all that, and I prefer to keep quiet till the new
administration. If the NEW administration is the clerical monarchy,
we shall see strange things. As for me, I don't care if they stand
in my way, but how about the future of our generation?...



CCXLV. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday, 4th December, 1872

Dear master,

I notice a phrase in your last letter: "The publisher would have
taste if the public had it...or if the public forced him to have
it." But that is asking the impossible. They have LITERARY IDEAS,
rest assured, and so have messieurs the managers of the theatre.
Both insist that they are JUDGES IN THAT RESPECT, and their
estheticism mingling with their commercialism makes a pretty result.

According to the publishers, one's last book is always inferior to
the preceding one. May I be hung if that is not true. Why does Levy
admire Ponsard and Octave Feuillet more than father Dumas and you?
Levy is academic. I have made more money for him than Cuvillier-
Fleury has, haven't I? Well, draw a parallel between us two, and you
will see how you will be received. You know that he did not want to
sell more than 1200 copies of the Dernieres Chansons, and the 800
which were left over, are in my niece's garret, rue de Clichy! That
is very narrow of me, I agree to that; but I confess that the
proceeding has simply enraged me. It seems to me that my prose might
have been more respected by a man for whom I have turned a penny or
two.

Why publish, in these abominable times? Is it to get money? What
mockery! As if money were the recompense for work, or could be! That
will be when one has destroyed speculation, till then, no! And then
how measure work, how estimate the effort? The commercial value of
the work remains. For that one would be obliged to suppress all
intermediaries between the producer and the purchaser, and even
then, that question in itself permits of no solution. For I write (I
speak of an author who respects himself) not for the reader of
today, but for all the readers who can present themselves as long as
the language lives. My merchandise, therefore, cannot be consumed,
for it is not made exclusively for my contemporaries. My service
remains therefore indefinite, and in consequence, unpayable.

Why publish then? Is it to be understood, applauded? But yourself,
YOU, great George Sand, you confess your solitude. Is there at this
time, I don't say, admiration or sympathy, but the appearance of a
little attention to works of art? Who is the critic who reads the
book that he has to criticise? In ten years they won't know,
perhaps, how to make a pair of shoes, they are becoming so
frightfully stupid! All that is to tell you that, until better times
(in which I do not believe), I shall keep Saint-Antoine in the
bottom of a closet.

If I publish it, I would rather that it should be at the same time
as another entirely different book. I am working now on one which
will go with it. Conclusion: the wisest thing is to keep calm.

Why does not Duquesnel go to find General Ladmirault, Jules Simon,
Thiers? I think that the proceeding concerns him. What a fine thing
the censorship is! Let us be reassured, it will always exist, for it
always has! Our friend Alexandre Dumas fils, to make an agreeable
paradox, has boasted of its advantages in the preface to the Dame
aux Camelias, hasn't he?

And you want me not to be sad! I think that we shall soon see
abominable things, thanks to the inept stubbornness of the Right.
The good Normans, who are the most conservative people in the world,
incline towards the Left very strongly.

If they consulted the bourgeoisie now, it would make father Thiers
king of France. If Thiers were taken away, it would throw itself in
the arms of Gambetta, and I am afraid it will do that soon! I
console myself by thinking that Thursday next I shall be fifty-one
years old.

If you are not to come to Paris in February, I shall go to see you
at the end of January, before going back to the Pan Monceau; I
promise.

The princess has written me to ask if you were at Nohant. She wants
to write to you.

My niece Caroline, to whom I have just given Nanon to read, is
enchanted with it. What struck her was the "youth" of the book. The
criticism seems true to me. It is a real BOOK while Francia,
although more simple, is perhaps more finished; more irreproachable
as a work.

I read last week the Illustre Docteur Matheus, by Erckmann-Chatrian.
How very boorish! There are two nuts, who have very plebeian souls.

Adieu, dear good master. Your old troubadour embraces you,

I am always thinking of Theo. I am not consoled for his loss.



CCXLVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 8 December, 1872

Oh! well, then, if you are in the realm of the ideal about this, if
you have a future book in your mind, if you are accomplishing a task
of confidence and conviction, no more anger and no more sadness, let
us be logical.

I myself arrived at a philosophical state of very satisfactory
serenity, and I did not OVERSTATE the matter when I said to you that
all the ill any one can do me, or all the indifference that any one
can show me, does not affect me really any more and does not prevent
me, not only from being happy outside of literature, but also from
being literary with pleasure, and from working with joy.

You were pleased with my two novels? I am repaid, I think that they
are SATISFACTORY, and the silence which has invaded my life (it must
be said that I have sought it) is full of a good voice that talks to
me and is sufficient to me. I have not mounted as high as you in my
ambition. You want to write for the ages. As for me, I think that in
fifty years, I shall be absolutely forgotten and perhaps unkindly
ignored. Such is the law of things that are not of first rank, and I
have never thought myself in the first rank. My idea has been rather
to act upon my contemporaries, even if only on a few, and to share
with them my ideal of sweetness and poetry. I have attained this end
up to a certain point; I have at least done my best towards it, I do
still, and my reward is to approach it continually a little nearer.

That is enough for myself, but, as for you, your aim is greater, I
see that clearly, and success is further off. Then you ought to put
yourself more in accord with yourself, by being still calmer and
more content than I am. Your momentary angers are good. They are the
result of a generous temperament, and, as they are neither malicious
nor hateful, I like them, but your sadness, your weeks of spleen, I
do not understand them, and I reproach you for them. I have
believed, I do still, that there is such a thing as too great
isolation, too great detachment from the bonds of life. You have
powerful reasons to answer me with, so powerful that they ought to
give you the victory.

Search your heart, think it over, and answer me, even if only to
dispel the fears that I have often on your account; I don't want you
to exhaust yourself. You are fifty years old, my son is the same or
nearly. He is in the prime of his strength, in his best development,
you are too, if you don't heat the oven of your ideas too hot. Why
do you say often that you wish you were dead? Don't you believe then
in your own work? Do let yourself be influenced then by this or that
temporary thing? It is possible, we are not gods, and something in
us, something weak and unimportant sometimes, disturbs our theodicy.
But the victory every day becomes easier, when one is sure of loving
logic and truth. It gets to the point even of forestalling, of
overcoming in advance, the subject of ill humor, of contempt or of
discouragement.

All that seems easy to me, when it is a question of self control:
the subjects of great sadness are elsewhere, in the spectacle of the
history that is unrolling around us; that eternal struggle of
barbarity against civilization is a great bitterness for those who
have cast off the element of barbarity and find themselves in
advance of their epoch. But, in that great sorrow, in these secret
angers, there is a great stimulant which rightly raises us up, by
inspiring in us the need of reaction. Without that, I confess, for
my part, that I would abandon everything.

I have had a good many compliments in my life, in the time when
people were interested in literature. I have always dreaded them
when they came to me from unknown people; they made me doubt myself
too much. I have made enough money to be rich. If I am not, it is
because I did not care to be; I have enough with what Levy makes for
me. What I should prefer, would be to abandon myself entirely to
botany, it would be for me a Paradise on earth. But it must not be,
that would be useful only to myself, and, if chagrin is good for
anything it is for keeping us from egoism, one must not curse nor
scorn life. One must not use it up voluntarily; you are enamoured of
JUSTICE, begin by being just to yourself, you owe it to yourself to
conserve and to develop yourself.

Listen to me; I love you tenderly, I think of you every day and on
every occasion: when working I think of you. I have gained certain
intellectual benefits which you deserve more than I do, and of which
you ought to make a longer use. Consider too, that my spirit is
often near to yours, and that it wishes you a long life and a
fertile inspiration in true joys.

You promise to come; that is a joy and a feast day for my heart, and
in my family.

Your old troubadour



CCXLVII. TO GEORGE SAND
12 December 1872

Dear good master,

Don't take seriously the exaggerations about my IRE. Don't believe
that I am counting "on posterity, to avenge me for the indifference
of my contemporaries." I meant to say only this: if one does not
address the crowd, it is right that the crowd should not pay one. It
is political economy. But, I maintain that a work of art (worthy of
that name and conscientiously done) is beyond appraisal, has no
commercial value, cannot be paid for. Conclusion: if the artist has
no income, he must starve! They think that the writer, because he no
longer receives a pension from the great, is very much freer, and
nobler. All his social nobility now consists in being the equal of a
grocer. What progress! As for me, you say to me "Let us be logical";
but that's just the difficulty.

I am not sure at all of writing good things, nor that the book of
which I am dreaming now can be well done, which does not prevent me
from undertaking it. I think that the idea of it is original,
nothing more. And then, as I hope to spit into it the gall that is
choking me, that is to say, to emit some truths, I hope by this
means to PURGE MYSELF, and to be henceforward more Olympian, a
quality that I lack entirely. Ah! how I should like to admire
myself!

Mourning once more: I headed the procession at the burial of father
Pouchet last Monday. That gentle fellow's life was very beautiful,
and I mourned him.

I enter today upon my fifty-second year, and I insist on embracing
you today: I do it affectionately, since you love me so well.



CCXLVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 8 January, 1873

Yes, yes, my old friend, you must come to see me. I am not thinking
of going to Paris before the end of the winter, and it is so hard to
see people in Paris. Bring me Saint-Antoine.  I want to hear it, I
want to live in it with you. I want to embrace you with all my soul,
and Maurice does too.

Lina loves you too, and our little ones have not forgotten you. I
want you to see how interesting and lovely my Aurore has become. I
shall not tell you anything new about myself. I live so little in
myself. This will be a good reason for you to talk about what
interests me more, that is to say, about yourself. Tell me ahead so
that I can spare you that horrid coach from Chateauroux to Nohant.
If you could bring Tourgueneff, we should be happy, and you would
have the most perfect travelling companion. Have you read Peres et
Enfants? How good it is!

Now, I hope for you really this time, and I think that our air will
do you good. It is so lovely here!

Your old comrade who loves you,

G. SAND

I embrace you six times for the New Year.



CCXLIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Monday evening, 3 February, 1873

Dear master,

Do I seem to have forgotten you and not to want to make the journey
to Nohant? Not at all! But, for the last month, every time I go out,
I am seized anew with the grippe which gets worse each time. I cough
abominably, and I ruin innumerable pocket-handkerchiefs! When will
it be over?

I have sworn not to step beyond my doorsill till I am completely
well again, and I am still awaiting the good will of the members of
the commission for the Bouilhet fountain! For nearly two months, I
have not been able to get together in Rouen six citizens of Rouen!
That is the way friends are! Everything is difficult, the least
undertaking demands great efforts.

I am reading chemistry now (which I don't understand a bit), and the
Raspail theory of medicine, not to mention the Potager moderne of
Gressent and the Agriculture of Gasparin. In this connection,
Maurice would be very kind, to compile his agronomical
recollections, so that I may know what mistakes he made and why he
made them.

What sorts of information don't I need, for the book that I am
undertaking? I have come to Paris this winter with the idea of
collecting some; but if my horrible cold continues, my stay here
will be useless! Am I going to become like the canon of Poitiers, of
whom Montaigne speaks, who for thirty years did not leave his room
"because of his melancholic infirmity," but who, however, was very
well "except for a cold which had settled on his stomach." This is
to tell you that I am seeing very few people. Moreover whom could I
see? The war has opened many abysses. I have not been able to get
your article on Badinguet. I am planning to read it at your house.

As regards reading, I have just swallowed ALL the odious Joseph de
Maistre. They have saddled us enough with this gentleman! And the
modern socialists who have praised him beginning with the saint-
simonians and ending with A. Comte. France is drunk with authority,
no matter what they say. Here is a beautiful idea that I find in
Raspail, THE PHYSICIANS OUGHT to be MAGISTRATES, so they could
force, etc.

Your romantic and liberal old dunce embraces you tenderly.



CCL. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 5 February, 1873

I wrote to you yesterday to Croisset, Lina thinking that you had
returned there. I asked you the little favor which you have already
rendered me, namely, to ask your brother to give his patronage to my
friend Despruneaux in his suit which is going to be appealed. My
letter will probably be forwarded to you in Paris, and reach you as
quickly as this one. It is only a question of writing a line to your
brother, if that does not bother you.

Pray, what is this obstinate cough? There is only one remedy, a
minimum dose, a half-centigram of acetate of morphine taken every
evening after digesting your dinner, for a week at least. I do
nothing else and I always get over it, I cure all my family the same
way, it is so easy to do and so quickly done! At the end of two or
three days one feels the good effect. I am awaiting your cure with
impatience, for your sake first, and second for myself, because you
will come and because I am hungry and thirsty to see you.

Maurice is at a loss to know how to answer your question. He has not
made any mistake in his experiments, and knows indeed those that
others make or could make; but he says that they vary infinitely and
that each mistake is a special one for the conditions in which one
works. When you are here and he understands really what you want, he
can answer you for everything that concerns the center of France,
and the general geology of the planet, if there is any opportunity
to generalize. His reasoning has been this: not to make innovations,
but to push to its greatest development what exists, in making use
always of the method established by experience. Experience can never
deceive, it may be incomplete, but never mendacious. With this I
embrace you, I summon you, I await you, I hope for you, but will not
however torment you.

But we love you, that is certain; and we would like to infuse in you
a little of our Berrichon patience about the things in this world
which are not amusing, we know that very well! But why are we in
this world if it is not to learn patience.

Your obstinate troubadour who loves you.

G. Sand



CCLI. TO GEORGE SAND
Tuesday, March 12, 1873

Dear master,

If I am not at your house, it is the fault of the big Tourgueneff. I
was getting ready to go to Nohant, when he said to me: "Wait, I'll
go with you the first of April." That is two weeks off. I shall see
him tomorrow at Madame Viardot's and I shall beg him to go earlier,
as I am beginning to be impatient. I am feeling the NEED of seeing
you, of embracing you, and of talking with you. That is the truth.

I am beginning to regain my equilibrium again. What is it that I
have had for the past four months? What trouble was going on in the
depths of my being? I don't know. What is certain, is, that I was
very ill in an indefinable way. But now I am better. Since the end
of January, Madame Bovary and Salammbo have belonged to me and I can
sell them. I am doing nothing about it, preferring to do without the
money other than to exasperate my nerves. Such is your old
troubadour.

I am reading all sorts of books and I am taking notes for my big
book which will take five or six years to write, and I am thinking
of two or three others. There will be dreams for a long time, which
is the principal thing.

Art continues to be "in the marasmus," as M. Prudhomme says, and
there is no longer any place in this world for people with taste.
One must, like the rhinoceros, retire into solitude and await one's
death.



CCLII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 15 March, 1873

Well, my old troubadour, we can hope for you very soon. I was
worried about you. I am always worried about you. To tell the truth,
I am not happy over your ill tempers, and your PREJUDICES. They last
too long, and in effect they are like an illness, you recognize it
yourself. Now, forget; don't you know how to forget? You live too
much in yourself and get to consider everything in relation to
yourself. If you were an egoist, and a conceited person, I would say
that it was your normal condition; but with you who are so good and
so generous, it is an anomaly, an evil that must be combated. Rest
assured that life is badly arranged, painful, irritating for
everyone, but do not neglect the immense compensations which it is
ungrateful to forget.

That you get angry with this or that person, is of little importance
if it is a comfort to you; but that you remain furious, indignant
for weeks, months, almost years, is unjust and cruel to those who
love you, and who would like to spare you all anxiety and all
deception.

You see that I am scolding you; but while embracing you, I shall
think only of the joy and the hope of seeing you flourishing again.
We are waiting for you with impatience, and we are counting on
Tourgueneff whom we adore also.

I have been suffering a good deal lately with a series of very
painful hemorrhages; but they have not prevented me from amusing
myself writing tales and from playing with my LITTLE CHILDREN. They
are so dear, and my big children are so good to me, that I shall
die, I believe, smiling at them. What difference does it make
whether one has a hundred thousand enemies if one is loved by two or
three good souls? Don't you love me too, and wouldn't you reproach
me for thinking that of no account? When I lost Rollinat, didn't you
write to me to love the more those who were left? Come, so that I
may OVERWHELM you with reproaches; for you are not doing what you
told me to do.

We are expecting you, we are preparing a mid-Lent fantasy; try to
take part. Laughter is a splendid medicine. We shall give you a
costume; they tell me that you were very good as a pastry cook at
Pauline's! If you are better, be certain it is because you have
gotten out of your rut and have distracted yourself a little. Paris
is good for you, you are too much alone yonder in your lovely house.
Come and work, at our house; how perfectly easy to send on a box of
books!

Send word when you are coming so that I can have a carriage at the
station at Chateauroux.



CCLIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Thursday, 20 March, 1873

Dear master,

The gigantic Tourgueneff is at this moment leaving here and we have
just sworn a solemn oath. You will have us at dinner the 12th of
April, Easter Eve.

It has not been a small job to get to that point, it is so difficult
to succeed in anything, no matter what.

For my part nothing would prevent me from going tomorrow But our
friend seems to me to enjoy very little liberty and I myself have
engagements the first week in April.

I am going this evening to two costume balls! Tell me after that
that I am not young.

A thousand affectionate greetings from your old troubadour who
embraces you.

Read as an example of modern fetidness, in the last number of the
Vie Parisienne, the article on Marion Delorme. It ought to be
framed, if, however, anything fetid can be framed. But nowadays
people don't look so closely.



CCLIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 23 March, 1873

No, that giant does not do as he likes, I have noticed that. But he
is one of the class that finds its happiness in being ruled and I
can understand it, on the whole. Provided one is in good hands,--and
he is.

Well, we are hoping still, but we are not absolutely counting on
anyone but you. You can not give me a greater pleasure than by
telling me that you are going out among people, that you are getting
out of a rut and distracting yourself, absolutely necessary, in
these muddled days.

On the day when a little intoxication is no longer necessary for
self-preservation, the world will be getting on very well. We
haven't come to that yet.

That FETID thing is not worth the trouble of reading, I didn't
finish it, one turns away from such things, one does not spoil one's
sense of smell by breathing them. But I do not think that the man to
whom one offers that in a censer would be satisfied with it.

Do come with the swallows and bring Saint-Antoine. It is Maurice who
is going to be interested in that! He is more of a scholar than I
am, I who will appreciate, thanks to my ignorance about many things,
only the poetic and great side of it. I am sure of it, I know
already that it is there.

Keep on going about, you must, and above all continue to love us as
we love you.

Your old troubadour,

G. Sand



CCLV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 7th April, 1873

I am writing to my friend General Ferri Pisani, whom you know, who
HAS CHARGE at Chateauroux, to reserve you a carriage  which will be
waiting for you on the 12th, at the station, at twenty minutes past
three. You must leave Paris at ten minutes past nine o'clock by the
EXPRESS. Otherwise the trip is too long and stupid. I hope that the
general will come with you, if there is any decision contrary to
your promise send him a telegram to Chateauroux so that he shall not
wait for you. He usually comes on horseback.

We are looking forward IMPATIENTLY to seeing you.

Your old troubadour

G. Sand


CCLVI. TO GEORGE SAND
23 April, 1873

It is only five days since we parted, and I am missing you like the
devil. I miss Aurore and all the household down to Fadette. Yes,
that is the way it is, one is so happy at your house! you are so
good and so interesting.

Why can't we live together, why is life always so badly arranged?
Maurice seems to me to be the type of human happiness. What does he
lack? Certainly, he is no more envied by anyone than by me.

Your two friends, Tourgueneff and Cruchard philosophized about that
from Nohant to Chateauroux, very comfortably borne along in your
carriage at a smart pace by two horses. Hurrah for the postillions
of La Chatre! But the rest of the trip was horrid because of the
company we had in our car. I was consoled for it by strong drink, as
the Muscovite had a flask full of excellent brandy with him. We both
felt a little heavy hearted. We did not talk, we did not sleep.

We found here the barodetien folly in full flower again.  On the
heels of this affair has developed during the last three days,
Stoppfel! another bitter narcotic! Oh! Heavens! Heavens! what a bore
to live in such times! How wise you are live so far from Paris!

I have begun my readings again, and, in a week I shall begin my
excursions hereabouts to discover a countryside that may serve for
my two good men. After which, about the 12th or the 15th, I shall
return to my house at the water-side. I want very much, this summer,
to go to Saint Gervais, to bleach my nose and to strengthen my
nerves. For ten years I have been finding a pretext for doing
without it. But it is high time to beautify myself, not that I have
any pretensions at pleasing and seducing by my physical graces, but
I hate myself too much when I look in my mirror. The older one
grows, the more care one should take of oneself.

I shall see Madame Viardot this evening, I shall go early and we
will talk of you.

When shall we meet again, now? How far Nohant is from Croisset!

Yours, dear good master, all my affection.

Gustave Flaubert

otherwise called the R. P. Cruchard of the Barnabites, director of
the Ladies of Disillusion.



CCLVII. TO GEORGE SAND

Dear master,

Cruchard should have thanked you sooner for sending him your last
book; but his reverence is working like ten thousand negroes, that
is his excuse. But it did not hinder him from reading "Impressions
et Souvenirs." I already knew some of it, from having read it in le
Temps (a pun). [Footnote: "Dans de temps" means also, "some time
ago."]

This is what was new to me and what struck me: (1) the first
fragment; (2) the second in which there is a charming and just page
on the Empress. How true is what you say of the proletariat! Let us
hope that its reign will pass like that of the bourgeois, and for
the same causes, as a punishment for the same folly and a similar
egoism.

The "Reponse a un ami" I knew, as it was addressed to me.

The "Dialogue avec Delacroix" is instructive; two curious pages on
what he thought of father Ingres.

I am not entirely of your opinion as regards the punctuation. That
is to say that I would shock you by my exaggeration in that respect;
but I do not lack, naturally, good reasons to defend my point of
view.

"J'allume le fagot," etc., all of this long article charmed me.

In the "Idees d'un maitre d'ecole," I admire your pedagogic spirit,
dear master, there are many pretty a b c phrases.

Thank you for what you say of my poor Bouilhet!

I adore your "Pierre Bonin." I have known people like him, and as
these pages are dedicated to Tourgueneff it is the moment to ask you
if you have read "I'Abandonnee"? For my part, I find it simply
sublime. This Scythian is an immense old fellow.

I am not at such high-toned literature now. Far from it! I am
hacking and re-hacking "le Sexe faible." I wrote the first act in a
week. It is true that my days are long. I spent, last week, one of
eighteen hours, and Cruchard is as fresh as a young girl, not tired,
no headache. In short, I think that I shall be through that work in
three weeks. After that, God knows what!

It would be funny if Carvalho's fantasticality was crowned with
success!

I am afraid that Maurice has lost his wager, for I want to replace
the three theological virtues by the face of Christ appearing in the
sun. What do you think about it? When the correction is made and I
have strengthened the massacre at Alexandria and clarified the
symbolism of the fantastic beasts, "Saint-Antoine" will be finished
forever, and I shall start at my two good fellows who were set aside
for the comedy.

What a horrid way of writing is required for the stage! The
ellipses, the delays, the questions and the repetitions have to be
lavish, if movement is desired, and all that in itself is very ugly.

I am perhaps blinding myself, but I think that I am now writing
something very quick and easy to play. We shall see.

Adieu, dear master, embrace all yours for me.

Your old good-for-nothing Cruchard, friend of Chalumeau. Note that
name. It is a gigantic story, but it requires one to toe the mark to
tell it suitably.



CCLVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 4 July, 1873

I don't know where you are at present, Cruchard of my heart. I am
addressing this to Paris whence I suppose it will be forwarded to
you. I have been ill, your reverence, nothing except a stupid
anemia, no legs, no appetite, continual sweat on the forehead and my
heart as jumpy as a pregnant woman; it is unfair, that condition,
when one gets to the seventies, I begin my seventieth spring
tomorrow, cured after a half score of river baths. But I find it so
comfortable to rest that I have not yet done an iota of work since I
returned from Paris, and until I opened my ink-well again to write
to you today. We reread your letter this morning in which you said
that Maurice had lost his wager. He insists that he has won it as
you are taking out the vertus theologales.

As for me, bet or no bet, I want you to keep the new version which
is quite in the atmosphere, while the theological virtues are not.--
Have you any news of Tourgueneff? I am worried about him. Madame
Viardot wrote me, several days ago, that he had fallen and hurt his
leg.--Yes, I have read l'Abandonnee, it is very beautiful as is all
that he does. I hope that his injury is not serious! such a thing is
always serious with gout.

So you are still working frantically? Unhappy one! you don't know
the ineffable pleasure of doing nothing! And how good work will seem
to me after it! I shall delay it however as long as possible. I am
getting more and more of the opinion that nothing is worth the
trouble of being said!

Don't believe a word of that, do write lovely things, and love your
old troubadour who always cherishes you.

G. Sand

Love from all Nohant.



CCLIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Thursday

Why do you leave me so long without any news of yourself, dear good
master? I am cross with you, there!

I am all through with the dramatic art. Carvalho came here last
Saturday to hear the reading of le Sexe faible, and seemed to me to
be satisfied with it. He thinks it will be a success. But I put so
little confidence in the intelligence of all those rascals, that for
my part, I doubt it.

I am exhausted, and I am now sleeping ten hours a night, not to
mention two hours a day. That is resting my poor brain.

I am going to resume my readings for my wretched book, which I shall
not begin for a full year.

Do you know where the great Tourgueneff is now?

A thousand affectionate greetings to all and to you the best of
everything from your old friend.



CCLX. TO GEORGE SAND
Sunday ...

I am not like M. de Vigny, I do not like the "sound of the horn in
the depth of the woods." For the last two hours now an imbecile
stationed on the island in front of me has been murdering me with
his instrument. That wretched creature spoils my sunlight and
deprives me of the pleasure of enjoying the summer. For it is lovely
weather, but I am bursting with anger. I should like, however, to
talk a bit with you, dear master.

In the first place, congratulations on your seventieth year, which
seems more robust to me than the twentieth of a good many others!
What a Herculean constitution you have! Bathing in an icy stream is
a proof of strength that bewilders me, and is a mark of a "reserve
force" that is reassuring to your friends. May you live long. Take
care of yourself for your dear grandchildren, for the good Maurice,
for me too, for all the world, and I should add: for literature, if
I were not afraid of your superb disdain.

Ha! good! again the hunting horn! The man is mad. I want to go and
find the rural guard.

As for me, I do not share your disdain, and I am absolutely ignorant
of, as you say, "the pleasure of doing nothing." As soon as I no
longer hold a book, or am not dreaming of writing one, A LAMENTABLE
boredom seizes upon me. Life, in short seems tolerable to me only by
legerdemain. Or else one must give oneself up to disordered pleasure
... and even then!

Well, I have finished with le Sexe faible, which will be played, at
least so Carvalho promises, in January, if Sardou's l'Oncle Sam is
permitted by the censorship; if otherwise, it will be in November.

As I have been accustomed during the last six weeks to seeing things
from a theatrical point of view, to thinking in dialogue, here I am
starting to build the plot of another play! It will be called le
Candidat. My written plot is twenty pages long. But I haven't anyone
to show it to. Alas! I shall therefore leave it in a drawer and
start at my old book. I am reading l'Histoire de la Medecine by
Daremberg, which amuses me a great deal, and I have finished l'Essai
sur les facultes de l'entendement by Gamier, which I think very
silly. There you have my occupations. THINGS seem to be getting
quieter. I breathe again.

I don't know whether they talk as much of the Shah in Nohant as they
do around here. The enthusiasm has been immense. A little more and
they would have proclaimed him Emperor. His sojourn in Paris has
had, on the commercial shop-keeping and artisan class, a monarchical
effect which you would not have suspected, and the clerical
gentlemen are doing very well, very well indeed!

On the other side of the horizon, what horrors they are committing
in Spain! So that the generality of humanity continues to be
charming.



CCLXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 30 August, 1873

Where are you to be found now? where are you nestled? As for me, I
have just come from Auvergne with my whole household, Plauchut
included. Auvergne is beautiful, above all it is pretty. The flora
is always rich and interesting, the walking rough, the living
accommodations poor. I got through it all very well, except for the
elevation of two thousand meters at Sancy, which combining an icy
wind with a burning sun, laid me flat for four days with a fever.
After that I got into the running again, and I am returning here to
resume my river baths till the frost.

There was no more question of any work, of any literature at all,
than if none of us had ever learned to read. The LOCAL POETS pursued
me with books and bouquets. I pretended to be dead and was left in
peace. I am square with them now that I am home, by sending a copy
of something of mine, it doesn't matter what, in exchange. Ah! what
lovely places I have seen and what strange volcanic combinations,
where we ought to have heard your Saint-Antoine in a SETTING worthy
of the subject! Of what use are these pleasures of vision, and how
are these impressions transformed later? One does not know ahead,
and, with time and the easy ways of life, everything is met with
again and preserved.

What news of your play? Have you begun your book? Have you chosen a
place to study? Do tell me what is becoming of my Cruchard, the
Cruchard of my heart. Write to me even if only a word! Tell me that
you still love us as I love you and as all of us here love you.

G. Sand



CCLXII. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Friday, 5th September, 1873

On arriving here yesterday, I found your letter, dear good master.
All is well with you then, God be praised!

I spent the month of August in wandering about, for I was in Dieppe,
in Paris, in Saint-Gratien, in Brie, and in Beauce, hunting for a
certain country that I had in mind, and I think that I have found it
at last in the neighborhood of Houdan. But, before starting at my
terrifying book, I shall make a last search on the road that goes
from Loupe to Laigle. After that, good night.

The Vaudeville begins well. Carvalho up to now has been charming.
His enthusiasm is so strong even that I am not without anxieties.
One must remember the good Frenchmen who cried "On to Berlin," and
then received such a fine drubbing.

Not only is the aforesaid Carvalho content with the le Sexe faible,
but he wants me to write at once another comedy, the scenario of
which I have shown him, and which he would like to produce a year
from now. I don't think the thing is quite ready to be put into
words. But on the other hand, I should like to be through with it
before undertaking the story of my good men. Meanwhile, I am keeping
on with my reading and note-taking.

You are not aware, doubtless, that they have forbidden Coetlogon's
play formally, BECAUSE IT CRITICISED THE EMPIRE. That is the
censorship's answer. As I have in the le Sexe faible a rather
ridiculous general, I am not without forebodings. What a fine thing
is Censorship! Axiom: All governments curse literature, power does
not like another power.

When they forbade the playing of Mademoiselle La Quintinie, you were
too stoical, dear master, or too indifferent. You should always
protest against injustice and folly, you should bawl, froth at the
mouth, and smash when you can. If I had been in your place with your
authority, I should have made a grand row. I think too that Father
Hugo was wrong in keeping quiet about le Roi s'amuse. He often
asserts his personality on less legitimate occasions.

At Rouen they are having processions, but the effect is completely
spoiled, and the result of it is deplorable for fusion! What a
misfortune! Among the imbecilities of our times, that (fusion) is
perhaps the greatest. I should not be surprised if we should see
little Father Thiers again! On the other hand many Reds, from fear
of the clerical reaction, have gone over to Bonapartism. One needs a
fine dose of simplicity to keep any political faith.

Have you read the Antichrist? I find that indeed a beautiful book,
aside from some faults of taste, some modern expressions applied to
ancient things. Renan seems to me on the whole to have progressed. I
passed all one evening recently with him and I thought him adorable.



CCLXIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 3d October, 1873

The existence of Cruchard is a beautiful poem, so much in keeping,
that I don't know if it is a fictitious biography or the copy for a
real article done in good faith. I had to laugh a bit after the
departure of all the Viardots (except Viardot) and the big
Muscovite, who was charming although very much indisposed from time
to time. He left very well and very gay, but regretting not to have
been to see you. The truth is that he was ill just then. He has had
a disordered stomach, like me, for some time. I get well by being
moderate, and he does not! I excuse him; after these crises one is
famished, and if it is because of an empty stomach that one has to
fill up, he must be terribly famished. What a kind, excellent and
worthy man! And what modest talent! Everyone adores him here and I
give them the example. We adore you too, Cruchard of my heart. But
you love your work better than your friends, and in that you are
inferior to the real Cruchard, who at least adored our holy
religion.

By the way, I think that we shall have Henry V. They tell me that I
am seeing the dark side of things; I don't see anything, but I
perceive the odor of sacristies that increases. If that should not
last a long time, I should like our clerical bourgeois to undergo
the scorn of those whose lands they have bought and whose titles
they have taken. It would be a good thing.

What lovely weather in our country! I still go every day to dip into
the cold rush of my little river and I feel better. I hope to resume
tomorrow my work that has been absolutely abandoned for six months.
Ordinarily, I take shorter holidays; but the flowering of the meadow
saffron always warns me that it is time to begin grubbing again.
Here it is, let us grub. Love me as I love you.

My Aurore, whom I have not neglected, and who is world: well, sends
you a big kiss. Lina, Maurice send affection.

G. Sand



CCLXIV. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Thursday

Whatever happens, Catholicism will receive a terrible blow, and if I
were a devotee, I should spend my time before a crucifix saying:
"Maintain the Republic for us, O my God!"

But THEY ARE AFRAID of the monarchy. Because of itself and because
of the reaction which would follow. Public opinion is absolutely
against it. The reports of messieurs the prefects are disquieting;
the army is divided into Bonapartists and Republicans; the body of
big business in Paris has pronounced against Henry V. Those are the
bits of information that I bring back from Paris, where I have spent
ten days. In a word, dear master, I think now that THEY will be
swamped! Amen!

I advise you to read the pamphlet by Cathelineau and the one by
Segur also. It is curious! The basis is clearly to be seen. Those
people think they are in the XIIth century.

As for Cruchard, Carvalho asked him for some changes which he
refused. (You know that sometimes Cruchard is not easy.) The
aforesaid Carvalho finally realized that it was impossible to change
anything in le Sexe faible without distorting the real idea of the
play. But he is asking to play le Candidat first, it is not finished
but it delights him--naturally. Then when the thing is finished,
reviewed and corrected, perhaps he won't want it. In short, if after
l'Oncle Sam, le Candidat is finished, it will be played. If not, it
will be le Sexe faible.

However, I don't care, I am so eager to start my novel which will
take me several years. And moreover, the theatrical style is
beginning to exasperate me. Those little curt phrases, this
continual scintillation irritates like seltzer water, which is
pleasing at first but shortly seems like nasty water. Between now
and January I am going to compose dialogues in the best manner
possible, after that I am coming back to serious things.

I am glad to have diverted you a little with the biography of
Cruchard. But I find it is hybrid and the character of Cruchard is
not consistent! A man with such an executive ability does not have
so many literary preoccupations. The archeology is superfluous. It
belongs to another kind of ecclesiastics. Perhaps there is a
transition that is lacking. Such is my humble criticism.

They had said in a theatrical bulletin that you were in Paris; I had
a mistaken joy about it, dear good master whom I adore and whom I
embrace.



CCLXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT

Your poor old troubadour, just getting well from a cruel attack of
rheumatism, during which he could not lie down, nor eat, nor dress
without aid, is at last up again. He suffered liver trouble,
jaundice, rash, fever, in short he was fit to be thrown out on a
pile of rubbish.

Here he is up again, very feeble, but able to write a few lines and
to say with you AMEN to the buried catholic dictatorships; it is not
even Catholics that they should be  called, those people are not.
They are only clericals.

I note today in the papers that they have played l'Oncle Sam. I hear
that it is bad, but it may very well be a success all the same. I
think that your play is surely postponed and Carvalho seems as
capricious too, to me, as hard to put your finger on as other
theatrical managers.

All Nohant embraces you and I embrace you even more, but I cannot
write any more.

G. Sand Monday

Hard work? When indeed can I start at it? I am NO GOOD.



CCLXVI. TO GEORGE SAND
January, 1874

As I have a quiet moment, I am going to profit by it by talking a
little with you, dear good master! And first of all, embrace for me
all your family and accept all my wishes for a Happy New Year!

This is what is happening now to your Father Cruchard.

Cruchard is very busy, but serene and very calm, which surprises
everybody. Yes, that's the way it is. No indignations, no boiling
over. The rehearsals of le Candidat have begun, and the thing will
be on the boards the first of February. Carvalho seems to me very
satisfied with it! Nevertheless he has insisted on my combining two
acts in one, which makes the first act inordinately long.

I did this work in two days, and Cruchard has been splendid! He
slept seven hours in all, from Thursday morning (Christmas Day) to
Saturday, and he is only the better for it.

Do you know what I am going to do to complete my ecclesiastical
character? I am going to be a godfather. Madame Charpentier in her
enthusiasm for Saint-Antoine came to beg me to give the name Antoine
to the child that she is expecting! I refused to inflict on this
young Christian the name of such an agitated man, but I had to
accept the honor that was done me. Can you see my old top-knot by
the baptismal font, beside the chubby-cheeked baby, the nurse and
the relatives? O civilization, such are your blows! Good manners,
such are your exactions!

I went on Sunday to the civic funeral of Francois-Victor Hugo. What
a crowd! and not a cry, not the least bit of disorder! Days like
that are bad for Catholicism. Poor father Hugo (whom I could not
help embracing) was very broken, but stoical.

What do you think of le Figaro, which reproached him for wearing at
his son's funeral, "a soft hat"?

As for politics, a dead calm. The Bazaine trial is ancient history.
Nothing shows better the contemporary demoralization than the pardon
granted to this wretched creature! Besides, the right of pardon if
one departs from theology is a denial of justice. By what right can
a man prevent the accomplishment of the law?

The Bonapartists should have let this alone; but not at all: they
defended him bitterly, out of hatred for the 4th of September. Why
do all the parties regard themselves as having joint interests with
the rascals who exploit them? It is because all parties are
execrable, imbecile, unjust, blind! An example: the history of Azor
(what a name!). He robbed the ecclesiastics. Never mind! the
clericals consider themselves attacked.

As regards the church. I have read in full (which I never did
before) Lamennais' Essai sur l'indifference. I know now, and
thoroughly, all the great buffoons who had a disastrous influence on
the XIXth century. To establish common sense or the prevailing mode
and custom as the criterion of certitude, that is preparing the way
for universal suffrage, which is, to my way of thinking, the shame
of human kind.

I have just read also, la Chretienne by the Abbe Bautain. A curious
book for a novelist. It smacks of its period of modern Paris. I
gulped a volume by Garcin de Tassy on Hindustani literature, to get
clean. One can breathe, at least, in that.

You see that your Father Cruchard is not entirely stupefied by the
theatre. However, I haven't anything to complain of in the
Vaudeville. Everyone there is polite and exact! How different from
the Odeon!

Our friend Chennevieres is now our superior, since the theatres are
in his division. The theatrical people are enchanted.

I see the Muscovite every Sunday. He is very well and like him
better and better.

Saint-Antoine will be in galley proof at the end of January.

Adieu, dear master! When shall we meet? Nohant is very far away! and
I am going to be, all this winter, very busy.



CCLXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
January, 1874

I am seized with a headache, but, although perfectly imbecile, I
want to embrace you and thank you for having written to me on New
Year's day. All Nohant loves you and smacks you, as they say in the
country.

We wish you a magnificent success and we are glad that it is not to
be at the cost of annoyances. However, that is hardly the way of the
actors whom I have known, and at the Vaudeville I have found only
those who were good natured. Have you a part for my friend Parade?
And for Saint-Germain, who seemed to you idiotic one day when
perhaps he had lunched too well, but who nevertheless is a fine
addlepate, full of sympathy and spirit. And with real talent!

I am not reading all these horrid things that you feed on so as to
sense better apparently the good things with which you sandwich
them. I have stopped laughing at human folly, I flee it and try to
forget it. As for admiration, I am always ready, it is the
healthiest regime by far, and too, I am glad to know that I shall
soon read Saint-Antoine again.

Keep in touch with your play and don't get ill this hateful winter.

Your old troubadour who loves you.

G. Sand



CCLXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Saturday evening, 7th February, 1874

I have at last a moment to myself, dear master; now let us talk a
little.

I knew through Tourgueneff that you were doing very well. That is
the main thing. Now I am going lo give you some news about that
excellent Father Cruchard.

Yesterday I signed the final proof for Saint-Antoine. ...But the
aforesaid old book will not be published until the first of April
(like an April fool trick?) because of the translations. It is
finished, I am not thinking any more about it! Saint-Antoine is
relegated, as far as I am concerned, to the condition of a memory!
However I do not conceal from you that I had a moment of great
sadness when I looked at the first proof. It is hard to separate
oneself from an old companion!

As for le Candidat, it will be played, I think, between the 2oth and
the 25th of this month. As that play gave me very little trouble and
as I do not attach great importance to it, I am rather calm about
the results of it.

Carvalho's leaving irritated and disturbed me for several days. But
his successor Cormon is full of zeal. Up to now I have nothing but
praise for him, as for all the others in fact. The people at the
Vaudeville are charming. Your old troubadour, whom you picture
agitated and always angry, is gentle as a lamb and even good
natured! First I made all the changes that THEY wanted, and then
THEY put back the original text. But of my own accord I have cut out
what seemed to me too long, and it goes well, very well. Delannoy
and Saint-Germain have excellent wigs and play like angels. I think
it will be all right.

One thing vexes me. The censorship has ruined the role of a little
legitimist ragamuffin, so that the play, conceived in the spirit of
strict unpartisanship, has now to flatter the reactionaries: a
result that distresses me. For I don't want to please the political
passions of anyone, no matter who it may be, having, as you know, an
essential hatred of all dogmatism, of all parties.

Well, the good Alexander Dumas has made the plunge! Here he is an
Academician! I think him very modest. He must be to think himself
honored by honors.



CCLXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 15 February, 1874

Everything is going well, and you are satisfied, my troubadour. Then
we are happy here over your satisfaction and we are praying for
success, and we are waiting impatiently Saint-Antoine so as to read
it again. Maurice has had a cold which attacks him every other day.
Lina and I are well, little girls superlatively so. Aurore learns
everything with admirable facility and docility; that child is my
life and ideal. I no longer enjoy anything except her progress. All
my past, all that I have been able to acquire or to produce, has no
value in my eyes unless it can profit her. If a certain portion of
intelligence and goodness was granted to me, it is so that she may
have a greater share. You have no children, be therefore a
litterateur, an artist, a master; that is logical, that is your
compensation, your happiness, and your strength. And do tell us that
you are getting on, that seems to us the main thing in life.--And
keep well, I think that these rehearsals which make you go to and
fro are good for you.

We all embrace you fondly.

G. Sand



CCLXX. TO GEORGE SAND
Saturday evening, 28 February, 1874

Dear master,

The first performance of le Candidat is set for next Friday, unless
it is Saturday, or perhaps Monday the 9th? It has been postponed by
Delannoy's illness and by l'Oncle Sam, for we had to wait until the
said Sam had come down to under fifteen hundred francs.

I think that my play will be very well given, that is all. For I
have no idea about the rest of it, and I am very calm about the
result, a state of indifference that surprises me greatly. If I were
not harassed by people who ask me for seats, I should forget
absolutely that I am soon to appear on the boards, and to expose
myself, in spite of my great age, to the derision of the populace.
Is it stoicism or fatigue?

I have been having and still have the grippe, the result of it for
your Cruchard, is a general lassitude accompanied by a violent (or
rather a profound) melancholy. While spitting and coughing beside my
fire, I muse over my youth. I dream of all my dead friends, I wallow
in blackness! Is it the result of a too great activity for the past
eight months, or the radical absence of the feminine element in my
life? But I have never felt more abandoned, more empty, more
bruised. What you said to me (in your last letter) about your dear
little girls moved me to the depths of my soul! Why haven't I that?
I was born with all the affections, however! But one does not make
one's destiny, one submits to it. I was cowardly in my youth, I had
a fear of life! One pays for everything.

Let us speak of other things, it will be gayer.

H. M. the Emperor of all the Russias does not like the Muses. The
censorship of the "autocrat of the north" had formally forbidden the
transportation of Saint-Antoine, and the proofs were returned me
from Saint Petersburg, last Sunday; the French edition even will be
prohibited. That is quite a serious money loss to me. It would have
taken very little for the French censorship to forbid my play. Our
friend Chennevieres gave me a good boost. Except for him I should
not be played. Cruchard does not please the temporal powers. Isn't
it funny, this simple hatred of authority, of all government
whatever, for art!

I am reading now books on hygiene. Oh! but they are comic! What
assurance physicians have! what effrontery! what asses for the most
part! I have just finished the Gaule poetique of Marchangy (the
enemy of Beranger). This book gave me hysterics.

So as to retemper myself in something stronger, I reread the great,
the most holy, the incomparable Aristophanes. There is a man, that
fellow! What a world in which such work were produced!



CCLXXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, March, 1874

Our two little girls cruelly ill with the grippe have taken up all
my time, but I am following, in the papers, the course of your play.
I would go to applaud it, my cherished Cruchard, if I could leave
these dear little invalids. So it is on Wednesday that they are
going to judge it. The jury may be good or stupid, one never knows!

I have started grubbing again after having rested from the long and
successful novel published by the Revue. I shall send it to you when
it is published in book form.

Don't you delay to give me the news on Thursday, I don't need to
tell you that success and the lack of it prove nothing, and that it
is a ticket in a lottery. It is agreeable to succeed; to a
philosophical spirit it ought not to be very distressing to fail. As
for me, without knowing the play, I predict a success on the first
day. As for its continuance, that is always unknown and unforeseen
from day to day.

We all embrace you very affectionately.

G. Sand



CCLXXII. TO GEORGE SAND
Thursday, one o'clock, 12 March, 1874

Speaking of FROSTS, this is one! People who want to flatter me
insist that the play will do better before the real public, but I
don't think so! I know the defects of my play better than anyone. If
Carvalho had not, for a month, bored me to death with corrections
that I have cut out, I would have made  re-touches or perhaps
changes which would perhaps have modified the final issue. But I was
so disgusted with it that I would not have changed a line for a
million francs. In a word, I am dished.

It must be said too that the hall was detestable, all fops and
students who did not understand the material sense of the words.
They made jokes of the poetical things. A poet says: "I am of 1830,
I learned to read in Hernani, and I wanted to be Lara." Thereupon a
burst of ironical laughter, etc.

And moreover I have fooled the public in regard to the title. They
expected another Rabagas! The conservatives have been vexed because
I did not attack the republicans. Similarly the communists would
have liked some insults against the legitimists.

My actors played superbly, Saint-Germain among others; Delannoy who
carries all the play, is distressed, and I don't know what to do to
soften his grief. As for Cruchard, he is calm, very calm! He had
dined very well before the performance, and after it he supped even
better. Menu: two dozen oysters from Ostend, a bottle of champagne
frappe, three slices of roast beef, a truffle salad, coffee and a
chaser. Religion and the stomach sustain Cruchard.

I confess that I should have liked to make some money, but as my
fall involves neither art nor sentiment I am profoundly unconcerned.

I tell myself: "well, it's over!" and I experience a feeling of
freedom. The worst of it all is the scandal about the tickets.
Observe that I had twelve orchestra seats and a box! (Le Figaro had
eighteen orchestra seats and three boxes.) I did not even see the
chief of the claque. One would say that the management of the
Vaudeville had arranged for me to fail. Its dream is fulfilled.

I did not give away a quarter of the seats that I needed and I
bought a great many for people who slandered me eloquently in the
lobbies. The "bravos" of a devoted few were drowned at once by the
"hushes." When they mentioned my name at the end, there was applause
(for the man but not for the work) accompanied by two beautiful cat-
calls from the gallery gods. That is the truth.

La Petite Presse of this morning is polite. I can ask no more of it.
Farewell, dear good master, do not pity me, for I don't feel
pitiable.

P. S.--A nice bit from my servant when he handed me your letter this
morning. Knowing your handwriting, he said sighing: "Ah! the best
one was not there last evening!" That is just what I think.



CCLXXIII TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday, April, 1874

Thank you for your long letter about le Candidat. Now here are the
criticisms that I add to yours: we ought to have: (1) lowered the
curtain after the electoral meeting and put the entire half of the
third act into the beginning of the fourth; (2) cut out the
anonymous letter, which is unnecessary, since Arabelle informs
Rousselin that his wife has a lover; (3) inverted the order of the
scenes in the fourth act, that is to say, beginning with the
announcement of the tryst between Madame Rousselin and Julien and,
making Rousselin a little more jealous. The anxieties of his
election turn him aside from his desire to go to entrap his wife.
Not enough is made of the exploiters. There should be ten instead of
three. Then, he gives his daughter. The end was there, and at the
instant that he notices the blackguardism, he is elected. Then his
dream is accomplished, but he feels no joy over it. In that manner
there would have been moral progress.

I think, whatever you say about it, that the subject was good, but
that I have spoiled it. Not one of the critics has shown me in what.
But I know, and that consoles me. What do you think of La Rounat,
who in his page implores me, "in the name of our old friendship,"
not to have my play printed, he thinks it so "silly and badly
written"! A parallel between me and Gondinet follows.

The theatrical mystery is one of the funniest things of this age.
One would say that the art of the theatre goes beyond the limits of
human intelligence, and that it is a secret reserved for those who
write like cab drivers. The QUESTION OF IMMEDIATE SUCCESS leads all
others. It is the school of demoralization. If my play had been
sustained by the management, it could have made money like another.
Would it have been the better for that?

The Tentation is not doing badly. The first edition of two thousand
copies is exhausted. Tomorrow the second will be published. I have
been torn in pieces by the petty journals and praised highly by two
or three persons. On the whole nothing serious has appeared yet, nor
will appear, I think. Renan does not write any more (he says) in the
Debats, and Taine is busy getting settled at Annecy.

I have been EXECRATED by the Messrs. Villemessant and Buloz, who
will do all they can to be disagreeable to me. Villemessant
reproaches me for not "having been killed by the Prussians." All
that is nauseous!

And you beg me not to notice human folly, and to deprive myself of
the pleasure of depicting it! But the comic is the only consolation
of virtue. There is, moreover, a manner of taking it which is
elevated; that is what I am aiming at with two good people. Don't
fear that they are too realistic! I am afraid, on the contrary, that
it may seem beyond the bounds of possibility, for I shall push the
idea to the limit.  This little work that I shall start in six weeks
will keep me busy for four or five years!



CCLXXIV. TO GEORGE SAND
April, 1874

As it would have necessitated a STRUGGLE, and as Cruchard has
lawsuits in horror, I have withdrawn my play on the payment of five
thousand francs, so much the worse! I will not have my actors
hissed! The night of the second performance when I saw Delannoy come
back into the wings with his eyes wet, I felt myself a criminal and
said to myself: "Enough." (Three persons affect me: Delannoy,
Tourgueneff and my servant!) In short, it is over. I am printing my
play, you will get it towards the end of the week.

I am jumped on on all sides! le Figaro and le Rappel; it is
complete! Those people to whom I lent money or for whom I did favors
call me an idiot. I have never had less nerves. My stoicism (or
pride) surprises myself even, and when I look for the causes, I ask
myself, dear master, if you are not one of them.

I recall the first night of Villemer, which was a triumph, and the
first night of Don Juan de Village, which was a failure. You do not
know how much I admired you on those two occasions! The dignity of
your character (a thing rarer still than genius) edified me! and I
formulated within myself this prayer: "Oh! how I wish I could be
like her, on a similar occasion." Who knows, perhaps your example
has sustained me? Forgive the comparison! Well, I don't bat an eye-
lid. That is the truth.

But I confess to regretting the THOUSANDS OF FRANCS which I should
have made. My little milk-jug is broken. I should have liked to
renew the furniture at Croisset, fooled again!

My dress rehearsal was deadly! Every reporter in Paris! They made
fun of it all. I shall underline in your copy, all the passages that
they seized on. Yesterday and the day before they did not seize on
them any more. Oh! well, so much the worse! It is too late. Perhaps
the PRIDE of Cruchard has killed it.

And they have written articles on MY dwellings, my SLIPPERS, my DOG.
The chroniclers have described my apartment where they saw "on the
walls, pictures and bronzes." But there is nothing at all on the
walls! I know that one critic was enraged because I did not go to
see him; and a third person came to tell me so this morning, adding:
"What do you want me to tell him?...But Messieurs Dumas, Sardou and
even Victor Hugo are not like you.--Oh! I know it!--Then you are not
surprised, etc."

Farewell, dear good adored master, friendly regards to yours. Kisses
to the dear little girls, and all my love to you.

P.S. Could you give me a copy or the original of Cruchard's
biography; I have no draft of it and I want to reread it to freshen
up MY IDEAL.



CCLXXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 10 April, 1874

Those who say that I do not think Saint-Antoine beautiful! and
excellent, lie about it, I do not need to tell you. Let me ask you
how I could have confided in the Levy clerks whom I do not know! I
remember, as for Levy himself, saying to him last summer, that I
found the thing superb and first class.

I would have done an article for you if I had not already refused
Maurice recently, to do one about Hugo's  Quatre-vingt-treize. I
said that I was ill. The fact is, that I do not know how to DO
ARTICLES, and I have done so many of them for Hugo that I have
exhausted my subject. I wonder why he has never done any for me;
for, really, I am no more of a journalist than he is, and I need his
support much more than he needs mine.

On the whole, articles are not of any use, now, no more than are
friends at the theatre. I have told you that it is the struggle of
one against all, and the mystery, if there is one, is to turn on an
electric current. The subject then is very important in the theatre.
In a novel, one has time to win the reader over. What a difference!
I do not say as you do that there is nothing mysterious in that.
Yes, indeed, there is something very mysterious in one respect:
namely that one can not judge of one's effect beforehand, and that
the shrewdest are mistaken ten times out of fifteen. You say
yourself that you have been mistaken. I am at work now on a play; it
is not possible to know if I am mistaken or not. And when shall I
know? The day after the first performance, if I have it performed,
which is not certain. There is no fun in anything except work that
has not been read to any one. All the rest is drudgery and
PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS, a horrible thing. So make fun of all this
GOSSIP; the guiltiest ones are those who report it to you. I think
it is very odd that they say so much against you to your friends. No
one indeed ever says anything to me: they know that I would not
allow it. Be valiant and CONTENT since Saint-Antoine is doing well
and selling better. What difference does it make if they cut you up
in this or that paper? In former times it meant something; in these
days, nothing. The public is not the public of other days, and
journalism has not the least literary influence. Every one is a
critic and forms his own opinions. They never write articles about
my novels. That doesn't make any difference to me.

I embrace you and we love you.

Your old troubadour.



CCLXXVI. TO GEORGE SAND
Friday evening, 1st May, 1874

Things are progressing, dear master, insults are accumulating! It is
a concerto, a symphony in which each one is intent on his own
instrument. I have been cut up beginning le Figaro up to la Revue
des Deux Mondes, including la Gazette de France and le
Constitutionnel. And THEY have not finished yet! Barbey d'Aurevilly
has insulted me personally, and the good Saint-Rene Taillandier, who
declares me "unreadable," attributes ridiculous words to me. So much
for printing. As for speech, it is in accord. Saint-Victor (is it
servility towards Michel Levy) rends me at the Brabant dinner, as
does that excellent Charles Edmond, etc. On the other hand I am
admired by the professors of the Faculty of Theology at Strasbourg,
by Renan, and by the cashier at my butcher's! not to mention some
others. There is the truth.

What surprises me, is that under several of these criticisms there
is a HATRED against me, against me personally, a deliberate
slandering, the cause of which I am seeking. I do not feel hurt, but
this avalanche of foolishness saddens me. One prefers inspiring good
feelings to bad ones. As for the rest, I am not thinking any more
about Saint-Antoine. That is over with!

I shall start, this summer, another book of about the same calibre;
after that I shall return to the novel pure and simple. I have in my
head two or three to write before I die. Just now I am spending my
days at the Library, where I am accumulating notes. In a fortnight,
I shall return to my house in the fields. In July I shall go to get
rid of my congestion on the top of a Swiss mountain, obeying the
advice of Doctor Hardy, the man who called me "a hysterical woman,"
a saying that I consider profound.

The good Tourgueneff is leaving next week for Russia, his trip will
forcibly interrupt his frenzy for pictures, for our friend never
leaves the auction rooms now! He is a man with a passion, so much
the better for him!

I missed you very much at Madame Viardot's a fortnight ago. She sang
Iphigenie en Aulide. I can not tell you how beautiful it was, how
transporting, in short how sublime. What an artist that woman is!
What an artist! Such emotions console one for life.

Well! and you, dear good master, that play that they talk about, is
it finished? You are going to fall back into the theatre! I pity
you! After having put dogs on the boards at the Odeon, perhaps they
are going to ask you to put on horses! That is where we are now!

And all the household, from Maurice to Fadet, how is it?

Kiss the dear little girls for me and let them return it to you from
me.

Your old friend.



CCLXXVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 4th May, 1874

Let them say what they like, Saint-Antoine is a masterpiece, a
magnificent book. Ridicule the critics, they are blockheads. The
present century does not like lyricism. Let us wait for the
reaction, it will come for you, and a splendid one. Rejoice in your
insults, they are great promises for the future.

I am working still on my play, I don't at all know if it is worth
anything and don't worry about it. I shall be told that when it is
finished, and if it does not seem interesting I shall lock it up. It
will have amused me for six weeks, that is the most certain thing
for us about our profession.

Plauchut is the joy of the salons! happy old man! always content
with himself and with others; that makes him as good as an angel, I
forgive him all his graces.

You were happy at hearing the Diva Paulita, we had her, with
Iphigenie, for two weeks in Nohant last autumn. Ah! yes, there is
beauty and grandeur! Try to come to see us before going to Croisset,
you would make us happy.

We all love you and all my dear world embraces you with a GREAT GOOD
HEART.

Your old troubadour always,

G. Sand



CCLXXVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, Tuesday, 26th March, 1874

Dear good master,

Here I am back again in my solitude! But I shall not remain in it
long, for, in a short month, I shall go to spend three weeks on the
Righi, so as to breathe a bit, to relax myself, to deneurasthenize
myself! It is a long time since I took the air, I am tired. I need a
little rest. After that I shall start at my big book which will take
at least four years. It will have that good quality!

Le Sexe faible which was accepted at the Vaudeville Carvalho, was
returned to me by the said Vaudeville and returned also by Perrin,
who thinks the play off-color and unconventional. "Putting a cradle
and a nurse on the French stage!" Think of it! Then, I took the
thing to Duquesnel who has not yet (naturally) given me any answer.
How far the demoralization which the theatres bring about extends!
The bourgeois of Rouen, my brother included, have been talking to me
of the failure of le Candidat in hushed voices (sic) and with a
contrite air, as if I had been taken to the assizes under an
accusation of forgery. NOT TO SUCCEED IS A CRIME and success is the
criterion of well doing. I think that is grotesque in a supreme
degree.

Now explain to me why they put mattresses under certain falls and
thorns under others? Ah! the world is funny, and it seems chimerical
to me to want to regulate oneself according to its opinion.

The good Tourgueneff must be now in Saint Petersburg; he sent me a
favorable article on Saint-Antoine from Berlin. It is not the
article, but he, that has given me pleasure. I saw him a great deal
this winter, and I love him more and more. I saw a good deal of
father Hugo who is (when the political gallery is absent) a
charming, good fellow.

Was not the fall of the Broglie ministry pleasing to you? Very much
so to me! but the next! I am still young enough to hope that the
next Chamber will bring us a change for the better. However?

Ah, confound it! how I want to see you and talk a long time with
you! Everything is poorly arranged in this world. Why not live with
those one loves? The Abbey of Theleme  [Footnote: Cf. Rabelais'
Gargantua.] is a fine dream, but nothing but a dream. Embrace warmly
the dear little girls for me, and entirely yours.

R. P. Cruchard

More Cruchard than ever. I feel like a good-for-nothing, a cow,
damned, antique, deliquescent, in short calm and moderate, which is
the last term in decadence.



CCLXXIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Kalt-Bad. Righi. Friday, 3d July, 1874

Is it true, dear master, that last week you came to Paris? I went
through it to go to Switzerland, and I read "in a sheet" that you
had been to see les Deux Orphelines, had taken a walk in the Bois de
Boulogne, had dined at Magny's, etc.; all of which goes to prove
that, thanks to the freedom of the Press, one is not master of one's
own actions. Whence it results that Father Cruchard is wrathful with
you for not having advised him of your presence in the "new Athens."
It seems to me that people are sillier and flatter there than usual.
The state of politics has become drivel! They have tickled my ears
with the return of the Empire. I don't believe in it! However...We
should have to expatriate ourselves then. But how and where?

Is it for a play that you came? I pity you for having anything to do
with Duquesnel! He had the manuscript of le Sexe faible returned to
me by an agent of the theatrical management, without a word of
explanation, and in the ministerial envelope was a letter from an
underclerk, which is a gem! I will show it to you. It is a
masterpiece of impertinence! People do not write in that way to a
Carpentras urchin, offering a skit to the Beaumarchais theatre.

It is that very play le Sexe faible that, last year, Carvalho was so
enthusiastic about! Now no one wants it any more for Perrin thinks
it unconventional to put on the boards of the Theatre Francais, a
nurse and a cradle. Not knowing what to do with it, I have taken it
to the Cluny Theatre.

Ah! my poor Bouilhet did well to die! But I think that the Odeon
could show more respect for his posthumous work.

Without believing in an Holbachic conspiracy, I think that they have
been knocking me a bit too much of late; and they are so indulgent
towards certain others.

The American Harrisse maintained to me the other day that Saint-
Simon wrote badly. At that I burst out and talked to him in such a
way that he will never more before me belch his idiocy. It was at
dinner at the Princess's; my violence cast a chill.

You see that your Cruchard continues not to listen to jokes on
religion! He does not become calm! quite the contrary!

I have just read la Creation naturelle by Haeckel, a pretty book,
pretty book! Darwinism seems to me to be better expounded there than
in the books of Darwin himself.

The good Tourgueneff has sent me news from the depths of Scythia. He
has found the information he wanted for a book that he is going to
do. The tone of his letter is frivolous, from which I conclude that
he is well. He will return to Paris in a month.

A fortnight ago I made a little trip to Lower Normandy, where I have
found at last a neighborhood suitable to place my two good men. It
will be between the valley of the Orne and the valley of the Auge. I
shall have to return there several times.

Beginning with September, then, I shall start that hard task! it
makes me afraid, and I am overwhelmed by it in advance.

As you know Switzerland, it is useless for me to talk to you of it,
and you would scorn me if I were to tell you that I am bored to
extinction here. I came here obediently because they ordered me to,
for the purpose of bleaching my face and calming my nerves! I don't
think that the remedy will be efficacious; anyhow it has been deadly
boring to me. I am not a man of nature, and I do not understand
anything in a country where there is no history. I would give all
these glaciers for the Vatican Museum. One can dream there. Well, in
three weeks I shall be glued to my green table! in a humble refuge,
where it seems to me you never want to come!



CCLXXX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 6th July, 1874 (Yesterday, seventy years.)

I was in Paris from the 30th of May to the 10th of June, you were
not there. Since my return here, I have been ill with the grippe,
rheumatic, and often absolutely deprived of the use of my right arm.
I have not the courage to stay in bed: I spend the evening with my
children and I forget my little miseries which will pass; everything
passes. That is why I was not able to write to you, even to thank
you for the good letter which you wrote to me about my novel. In
Paris I was overwhelmed by fatigue. That is the way I am growing
old, and now I am beginning to feel it; I am not more often ill,
now, illness PROSTRATES me more. That is nothing, I have not the
right to complain, being well loved and well cared for in my nest. I
urge Maurice to go about without me, since my strength is not equal
to going with him. He leaves tomorrow for Cantal with a servant, a
tent, a lamp, and a quantity of utensils to examine the MICROS of
his entomological DIVISION I am telling him that you are bored on
the Righi. He cannot understand it.

The 7th

I am taking up my letter again, begun yesterday; I still find it
very hard to move my pen, and even at this moment, I have a pain in
my side, and I cannot...

Till tomorrow.

The 8th

At last, I shall be able perhaps today: for I am furious to think
that perhaps you are accusing me of forgetting you, when I am
prevented by weakness that is entirely physical,  in which my
affections count for nothing. You tell me that they KNOCK you too
much. I read only le Temps and it is a good deal for me even to open
a paper to see about what it is talking. You ought to do as I do and
IGNORE criticism when it is not serious, and even when it is. I have
never been able to see what good it is to the author criticised.
Criticism always starts from a personal point of view, the authority
of which the artist does not recognize. It is because of that
usurpation of powers in the intellectual order of things, that
people get to discussing the Sun and the Moon; but that does
not prevent them in the least from showing us their good tranquil
faces.

You do not want to be a man of nature, so much the worse for you!
therefore you attach too much importance to the details of human
things, and you do not tell yourself that there is in you a NATURAL
force that defies the IFS and the BUTS of human prattle. We are of
nature, in nature, by nature, and for nature. Talent, will, genius,
are natural phenomena like the lake, the volcano, the mountain, the
wind, the star, the cloud. What man dabbles in is pretty or ugly,
ingenious or stupid; what he gets from nature is good or bad; but it
is, it exists and subsists. One should not ask from the jumble of
appreciation called CRITICISM, what one has done and what one wants
to do. Criticism does not know anything about it; its business is to
gossip.

Nature alone knows how to speak to the intelligence in a language
that is imperishable, always the same, because it does not depart
from the eternally true, the absolutely beautiful. The hard thing,
when one travels, is to find nature, because man has arranged it
everywhere and has almost spoiled it everywhere; probably it is
because of that that you are bored, it is because it is disguised
and travestied everywhere. However, the glaciers are still intact, I
presume.

But I cannot write further, I must tell you quickly that I love you,
that I embrace you affectionately. Give me news of yourself. I hope
to be on my feet in a few days. Maurice is waiting until I am robust
before he goes: I am hurrying as much as I can! My little girls
embrace you, they are superb. Aurore is devoted to mythology (George
Cox, Baudry translation). You know that? An adorable work for
children and parents. Enough, I can no more. I love you; don't have
black ideas, and resign yourself to being bored if the air is good
there.



CCLXXXI. TO GEORGE SAND
Righi, 14 July, 1874;

What? ill? poor, dear master! If it is rheumatism, do as my brother
does, who in his character of physician, scarcely believes in
medicine. Last year he went to the baths at Aix in Savoy, and in two
weeks he was cured of the pains that had tormented him for six
years. But to do that you would have to move, to resign your habits,
Nohant and the dear little girls. You will remain at home and YOU
WILL BE WRONG. You ought to take care of yourself ... for those who
love you.

And as regard this, you send me, in your last letter, a horrid
thing. Could I, for my part, suspect you of forgetting Cruchard!
Come now, I have, first of all, too much vanity and next, too much
faith in you.

You don't tell me how your play is getting on at the Odeon.

Speaking of plays, I am going again to expose myself to insults of
the populace and the penny-a-liners. The manager of the Cluny
Theatre, to whom I took le Sexe faible, has written me an admiring
letter and is disposed to put on that play in October. He is
reckoning on a great money success. Well, so be it! But I am
recalling the enthusiasm of Carvalho, followed by an absolute chill!
and all that increases my scorn for the so-called shrewd people who
pretend to know all about things. For, in short, there is a dramatic
work, declared by the managers of the Vaudeville and the Cluny
"perfect," by the Theatre Francais "unplayable," and by the manager
of the Odeon "in need of rewriting from one end to the other." Draw
a conclusion now! and listen to their advice! Never mind, as these
four gentlemen are the masters of your destinies because they have
the money, and as they have more mind than you, never having written
a line, you must believe them and submit to them.

It is a strange thing how much pleasure imbeciles find in
floundering about in the work of another! in cutting it,  correcting
it, playing the pedagogue! Did I tell you that I was, because of
that, very much at odds with a certain *****. He wanted to make
over, sometime ago, a novel that I had recommended to him, which was
not very good, but of which he is incapable of turning the least
phrase. And I did not hide from him my opinion about him; inde irae.
However, it is impossible for me to be so modest as to think that
that good Pole is better than I am in French prose. And you want me
to remain calm! dear master! I have not your temperament! I am not
like you, always soaring above the miseries of this world. Your
Cruchard is as sensitive as if he were divested of skin. And
imbecility, self-sufficiency, injustice exasperate him more and
more. Thus the ugliness of the Germans who surround me shuts off the
view of the Righi!!! Zounds! What mugs!

God be thanked, "of my horrible sight I purge their States."



CCLXXXII. TO GEORGE SAND
Saturday, 26 September, 1874

Then, after having been bored like an ass on the top of the Righi, I
returned home the first of August and started my book. The beginning
was not easy, it was even "direful," and "methought" I should die of
despair; but now things are going, I am all right, come what may!
But one needs to be absolutely mad to undertake such a book. I fear
that, by its very conception, it is radically impossible. We shall
see, Ah! supposing I should carry it out well ... what a dream.

You doubtless know that once more I am exposing myself to the storms
of the footlights (pretty metaphor) and that "braving the publicity
of the theatre" I shall appear upon the boards of Cluny, probably,
towards the end of December. The manager of that "little theatre" is
enchanted with le Sexe faible. But so was Carvalho, which did not
prevent him ... You know the rest.

Of course every one blames me for letting my play be given in such a
joint. But since the others do not want that play and since I insist
that it shall be presented to make a few sous for the Bouilhet
heirs, I am forced to pass that over. I am keeping two or three
pretty anecdotes about this to tell you when we meet. Why is the
theatre such a general cause of delirium? Once one is on that
ground, ordinary conditions are changed. If one has had the
misfortune (slight) not to succeed, friends turn from one. They are
very inconsiderate of one. They never salute one! I swear to you on
my word of honor that that happened to me on account of le Candida.
I do not believe in Holbachic conspiracies, but all that they have
done to me since March amazes me. But, I decidedly don't bat an
optic, and the fate of le Sexe faible disturbs me less than the
least of the phrases of my novel.

Public intelligence seems to me to get lower and lower! To what
depth of imbecility shall we descend? Belot's last book sold eight
thousand copies in two weeks. Zola's Conquete de Plassans, seventeen
hundred in six months, and there was an article about it. All the
Monday-morning idiots have just been swooning away about M. Scribe's
Une Chaine. France is ill, very ill, whatever they say; and my
thoughts are more and more the color of ebony.

However, there are some pretty comic elements: (1) the Bazaine
escape with the episode of the sentinel; (2) l'Histoire d'un Diamant
by Paul de Musset (see the Revue des Deux Mondes for September); (3)
the vestibule of the former  establishment of Nadar near Old England
[sic], where one can contemplate a life-size photograph of Alexander
Dumas.

I am sure that you are finding me grouchy and that you are going to
answer me: "What difference does all that make?" But everything
makes a difference, and we are dying of humbug, of ignorance, of
self-confidence, of scorn of grandeur, of love of banality, and
imbecile babble.

"Europe which hates us, looks at us and laughs," said Ruy Blas. My
Heavens, she has a right to laugh.



CCLXXXIII TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 5th November, 1874

What, my Cruchard, you have been ill? That is what I feared, I who
live in the woes of indigestion and yet hardly work at all, I am
disquieted at your kind of life, the excess of intellectual
expenditure and the seclusion. In spite of the charm that I have
proved and appreciated at Croisset, I fear for you that solitude
where you have no longer anyone to remind you that you must eat,
drink and sleep, and above all walk. Your rainy climate makes you
keep to the house. Here, where it does not rain enough, we are at
least hustled out of doors by the beautiful warm sun and that
Phoebus invigorates us, while our Phoebus-Apollo murders us.

But I am always talking to you as to a Cruchard philosophic and
detached from his personality, to a Cruchard fanatical about
literature and drunk with production. When, then, shall you be able
to say to yourself: Lo! this is the time for rest, let us taste the
innocent pleasure of living for life's sake, of watching with
amazement the agitations of others and of not giving to them
anything except the excess of our overflow. It does one good to
ruminate over what one has assimilated in life, sometimes without
attention and without discrimination.

Old friendships sustain us and all at once they distress us. I have
just lost my poor blind Duvernet, whom you have seen at our house.
He expired very quietly without suspecting it and without suffering.
There is another great void about us and my nephew, the substitute,
has been nominated for Chateauroux. His mother has followed him.

So we are all alone. Happily we love one another so much that we can
live like that, but not without regret for the absent ones. Plauchut
left us yesterday to return at  Christmas. Maurice is already at
work preparing a splendid performance of marionettes for us. And
you, if you are in Paris, won't you come to keep the Christmas Eve
revels with us? You will have finished your rehearsals, you will
have had a success, perhaps you will be in the mood to return to
material life, eating truffles?

Tell us about yourself, do not be ill, always love your old
troubadour and his people who love you too.

G. Sand



CCLXXXIV. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday, 2nd December, 1874

I am having remorse about you. It is a crime to let so long a time
elapse without answering such a letter as your last. I was waiting
to write to you until I had something definite to tell you about le
Sexe faible. What is definite is that I took it away from the Cluny
a week ago. The cast that Weinschenk proposed to me was odiously
stupid and he did not keep the promises that he made. But, God be
thanked, I withdrew in time. At present my play has been offered to
the Gymnase. No news up to now from Montigny.

I am worrying like five hundred devils about my book, asking myself
sometimes if I am not mad to have undertaken it. But, like Thomas
Diafoirus, I am stiffening myself against the difficulties of
execution which are frightful. I need to learn a heap of things
about which I am ignorant. In a month I hope to finish with the
agriculture and the gardening, and I shall only then be at the
second third of my first chapter.

Speaking of books, do read Fromont et Risler, by my friend Daudet,
and les Diaboliques, by my enemy Barbey d'Aurevilly. You will writhe
with laughter. It is perhaps owing to the perversity of my mind,
which likes unhealthy things, but the latter work seemed to me
extremely amusing; it is the last word in the involuntary grotesque.
In other respects, dead calm, France is sinking gently like a rotten
hulk, and the hope of salvage, even for the staunchest, seems
chimerical. You need to be here, in Paris, to have an idea of the
universal depression, of the stupidity, of the decrepitude in which
we are floundering.

The sentiment of that agony penetrates me and I am sad enough to
die. When I am not torturing myself about my work, I am groaning
about myself. That is the truth. In my leisure moments, all I do is
to think of the dead, and I am going to say a very pretentious thing
to you. No one understands me; I belong to another world. The men of
my profession are so little of my profession! There is hardly anyone
except Victor Hugo with whom I can talk of what interests me. Day
before yesterday he recited by heart to me from Boileau and from
Tacitus. That was like a gift to me, the thing is so rare. Moreover,
the days when there are not politicians at his house, he is an
adorable man.


CCLXXXV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 8th December, 1874

Poor dear friend,

I love you all the more because you are growing more unhappy. How
you torment yourself, and how you disturb yourself about life! for
all of which you complain, is life; it has never been better for
anyone or in any time. One feels it more or less, one understands it
more or less, one suffers with it more or less, and the more one is
in advance of the age one lives in, the more one suffers. We pass
like shadows on a background of clouds which the sun seldom pierces,
and we cry ceaselessly for the sun which can do no more for us. It
is for us to clear away our clouds.

You love literature too much; it will destroy you and you will not
destroy the imbecility of the human race. Poor dear! imbecility,
that, for my part, I do not hate, that I regard with maternal eyes:
for it is a childhood and all childhood is sacred. What hatred you
have devoted to it! what warfare you wage on it!

You have too much knowledge and intelligence, you forget that there
is something above art: namely, wisdom, of which art at its apogee
is only the expression. Wisdom comprehends all: beauty, truth,
goodness, enthusiasm, in consequence. It teaches us to see outside
of ourselves, something more elevated than is in ourselves, and to
assimilate it little by little, through contemplation and
admiration.

But I shall not succeed in changing you. I shall not even succeed in
making you understand how I envisage and how I lay hold upon
HAPPINESS, that is to say, the acceptation of life whatever it may
be! There is one person who could change you and save you, that is
father Hugo; for he has one side on which he is a great philosopher,
while at the same time he is the great artist that you require and
that I am not. You must see him often. I believe that he will quiet
you: I have not enough tempest in me now for you to understand me.
As for him, I think that he has kept his thunderbolts and that he
has all the same acquired the gentleness and the compassion of age.

See him, see him often and tell him your troubles, which are great,
I see that, and which turn too much to spleen. You think too much of
the dead, you think that they have too soon reached their rest. They
have not. They are like us, they are searching. They labor in the
search.

Every one is well, and embraces you. As for me, I do not get well,
but I have hopes, well or not, to keep on still so as to bring up my
grandchildren, and to love you as long as I have a breath left.

G. Sand



CCLXXXVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 16th January, 1875

I too, dear Cruchard, embrace you at the New Year, and wish that you
may have a tolerable one, since you do not care to hear the myth
happiness spoken of. You admire my serenity; it does not come from
my depths, it comes from my necessity of thinking only of others.
There is but a little time left, old age creeps on and death is
pushing me by the shoulders.

I am as yet, if not necessary, at least extremely useful, and I
shall go on as long as I have a breath, thinking, talking, working
for them.

Duty is the master of masters, it is the real Zeus of modern times,
the son of Time, and has become his master. It is that which lives
and acts outside of all the agitations of the world. It does not
reason, does not discuss. It examines without fear, it walks without
looking behind it; Cronos, the stupid, swallowed stones, Zeus breaks
them with the lightning, and the lightning is the will. I am not a
philosopher, I am a servant of Zeus, who takes away half of their
souls from slaves, but who leaves them entire to the brave.

I have no more leisure to think of myself, to dream of discouraging
things, to despair of human-kind, to look at my past sorrows and
joys and to summon death.

Mercy! If one were an egoist, one would see it approach with joy; it
is so easy to sleep in nothingness, or to awaken in a better life!
for it opens these two hypotheses, or to express it better, this
antithesis.

But, for the one who must continue working, death must not be
summoned before the hour when exhaustion opens the doors of liberty.
You have had no children. It is the punishment of those who wish to
be too independent; but that suffering is nevertheless a glory for
those who vow themselves to Apollo. Then do not complain for having
to grub, and describe your martyrdom to us; there is a fine book to
be written about that.

You say that Renan is despairing; for my part, I don't believe that:
I believe that he is suffering as are all those who look high and
far ahead; but he ought to have strength in proportion to his
vision. Napoleon shares his ideas, he does well if he shares them
all. He has written me a very wise and good letter. He now sees
relative safety in a wise republic, and I, too, think it still
possible. It will be very bourgeois and not very ideal, but one has
to begin at the beginning. We artists have no patience at all. We
want the Abbey of Theleme at once; but before saying, "Do what you
want!" one must go through with "Do what you can!" I love you and I
embrace you with all my heart, my dear Polycarp. My children large
and small join with me.

Come now, no weakness! We all ought to be examples to our friends,
our neighbors, our fellow citizens. And how about me, don't you
think that I need help and support in my long task that is not yet
finished? Don't you love anyone, not even your old troubadour, who
still sings, and often weeps, but who conceals himself when he
weeps, as cats do when they die?



CCLXXXVII. TO GEORGE SAND
Paris, Saturday evening

Dear master,

I curse once more THE DRAMATIC MANIA and the pleasure that certain
people have in announcing remarkable news! Someone had told me that
you were VERY ill. Your good handwriting came to reassure me
yesterday morning, and this morning I have received the letter from
Maurice, so the Lord be praised!

What to tell you about myself? I am not stiff, I have ... I don't
know what. Bromide of potassium has calmed me and given me eczema on
the middle of my forehead.

Abnormal things are going on inside me. My psychic depression must
relate to some hidden cause. I feel old, used up, disgusted with
everything, and others bore me as I do myself.

However, I am working, but without enthusiasm: as one does a stint,
and perhaps it is the work that makes me ill, for I have undertaken
a senseless book.

I lose myself in the recollections of my childhood like an old man
... I do not expect anything further in life than a succession of
sheets of paper to besmear with black. It seems to me that I am
crossing an endless solitude to go I don't know where. And it is I
who am at the same time the desert, the traveller, and the camel.

I spent the afternoon today at the funeral of Amedee Achard. The
Protestant ceremonies were as inane as if they had been Catholic.
ALL PARIS and the reporters were there in force!

Your friend, Paul Meurice, came a week ago to ask me to "do the
Salon" in le Rappel. I declined the honor, for I do not admit that
anyone can criticise an art of which he does not know the technique!
And then, what use is so much criticism!

I am reasonable. I go out every day, I exercise, and I come home
tired, and still more irritated, that is the good I get out of it.
In short, your troubadour (not very troubadourish) has become a sad
bonehead.

It is in order not to bore you with my complaints that I write so
rarely to you now, for no one has a livelier sense than I of my
unbearableness.

Send me Flamarande; that will give me a little air.

I embrace you all, and especially you, dear master, so great, so
strong, and so gentle. Your Cruchard, who is more and more cracked,
if cracked is the right word, for I perceive that the contents are
escaping.



CCLXXXVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
20th February

Then you are quite ill, dear old fellow? I am not worried about it,
since it concerns only nerves and rheumatisms, and I have lived
seventy years with all that nuisance in my body, and I am still
healthy. But I am sad to know that you are bored, suffering, and
your spirit turned to darkness as it necessarily is when one is ill.

I was sure that a moment would come when someone would prescribe
walking to you. All your illness comes from the lack of exercise, a
man of your strength and your complexion ought to have lived an
athletic life.

Don't sulk then about the very wise order that condemns you to an
hour's walk each day.

You fancy that the work of the spirit is only in the brain, you are
very much mistaken, it is also in the legs.

Tell me that two weeks of this regime has cured you. It will happen,
I am sure of it.

I love you, and I embrace you, as does every one of my brood.

Your old troubadour



CCLXXXIX. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 25th March, 1875

Don't be worried about me, my Polycarp. I have nothing serious, a
little grippe, and this right arm which hardly moves but which
electricity will cure. One thinks that it is an effort.

I am much more worried about you, although you are ten times as
strong as I am, but your morale is affected whereas mine takes what
comes, in a cowardly way, if you like, but there is perhaps a
philosophy in knowing how to be cowardly rather than angry.

Do write to me, tell me that you are going out of doors, that you
are walking, that you are better.--I have finished going over the
proofs of Flamarande. That is the most boring part of the task.

I shall send you the book when it is published. I know that you do
not like to read bit by bit.

I am a little tired; however, I want to begin something else. Since
it is not warm enough to go out, I get bored with not having
anything on the stocks. Everything is going well in the nest, except
for a few colds. Spring is so peevish this year! At last the pale
sun will become the dear Phoebus-Appolo with the shining hair, and
all will go well.

Aurore is getting so big that one is surprised to hear her laugh and
play like a child, always good, and tender, the other is always very
funny and facetious.

Tell us of yourself and always love us as we love you.

Your old troubadour



CCXC. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 7th May, 1875

You leave me without news of you? You say that you prefer to be
forgotten, rather than to complain ceaselessly, as it is very
useless and since you will not be forgotten; complain then, but tell
us that you are alive and that you still love us.

As you are much nicer, the more surly you are, I know that you are
not rejoicing over the death of poor Michel. For me, it is a great
loss in every way, for he was absolutely devoted to me and proved it
all the time by his care and services without number.

We are all well here. I am better since it is not cold any more, and
I am working a great deal. I am also doing many water colors, I am
reading the Iliad with Aurore, who does not like any translation
except Leconte de Lisle's, insisting that Homer is spoiled by
approximate renderings.

The child is a singular mixture of precocity and childishness. She
is nine years old and so large that one would think her twelve. She
plays dolls with passion, and she is as LITERARY as you or I,
meanwhile learning her own language which she does not yet know.

Are you still in Paris in this lovely weather? Nohant is now
STREAMING with flowers, from the tips of the trees to the turf;
Croisset must be even prettier, for it is cool, and we are
struggling with a drought that has now become chronic in Berry. But
if you are still in Paris, you have that beautiful Pare Monceau
under your eyes where you are walking, I hope, since you have to.
Life is at the price of walking!

Won't you come to see us? Whether you are sad or gay, we love you
the same here, and we wish that affection meant something to you,
but we shall give it to you, and we give it to you without
conditions.

I am thinking of going to Paris next month, shall you be there?

G. Sand



CCXCI. TO GEORGE SAND
Croisset, 10th May, 1875

A wandering gout, pains that go all over me, an invincible
melancholy, the feeling of "universal uselessness" and grave doubts
about the book that I am writing, that is what is the matter with
me, dear and valiant master. Add to that worries about money with
melancholic recollections of the past, that is my condition, and I
assure you that I make great efforts to get out of it. But my will
is tired. I cannot decide about anything effective! Ah! I have eaten
my white bread first, and old age is not announcing itself under gay
colors. Since I have begun hydrotherapy, however, I feel a little
less like a COW, and this evening I am going to begin work without
looking behind me.

I have left my apartment in the rue Murillo, and I have taken a
larger one which is next to the one that my niece has just reserved
on the Boulevard Reine Hortense. I shall be less alone next winter,
for I cannot endure solitude.

Tourgueneff seemed to me, however, to be very well pleased with the
two first chapters of my frightful book. But Tourgueneff loves me
too much, perhaps to judge impartially. I am not going to leave my
house for a long time now, for I WILL get ahead in my task, which
weighs on my chest like a burden of a million pounds. My niece will
come to spend all the month of June here. When she has gone away, I
shall make a little archeological and geological excursion in
Calvados, and that will be all.

No, I do not rejoice at Michel Levy's death, and I even envy him
that death so quiet. Just the same, that man did me a great deal of
harm. He wounded me deeply. It is true that I am endowed with an
absurd sensitiveness; what scratches others tears me to pieces. Why
am I not organized for enjoyment as I am for suffering!

The bit you sent me about Aurore who is reading Homer, did me good.
That is what I miss: a little girl like that! But one does not
arrange one's own destiny, one submits to it. I have always lived
from day to day, without plans for the future and pursuing my end
(one alone, literature) without looking to the right or to the left.
Everything that was around me has disappeared, and now I find I am
in a desert. In short, the element of distraction is absolutely
lacking to me. One needs a certain vivacity to write good things!
What can one do to get it again? How can one proceed, to avoid
thinking continually about one's miserable person? The sickest thing
in me is my humor: the rest doubtless would go well. You see, dear,
good master, that I am right to spare you my letters. Nothing is as
imbecile as the whiners.



CCXCII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Thursday morning, 10th June, 1875

We are leaving, Lina and I, on Saturday morning, and up to   then we
shall be on the move. If you wanted to come to dine with us Friday
at Magny's at six o'clock, at least we could say farewell. You
should be free at nine o'clock, for we go to bed with the chickens
in order to leave early the next day. What do you say?

I love you with all my heart.



CCXCIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT

Friend, I shall come at your call as soon as you say to me, "I have
finished."

I love you, and I embrace you.

G. Sand



CCXCIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 15 August

My poor, dear, old fellow,

I learn only today in a letter from that dear, lazy soul of a
Tourgueneff, about the misfortune which has come to your niece. Is
it then irreparable? Her husband is very young and intelligent,
can't he begin over again, or take a position that will give him a
living? They have no children, they do not need millions to live on,
young and well as they both are. Tourgueneff tells me that your
property has been affected by this failure. If it is AFFECTED MERELY
you will bear this serious annoyance philosophically. You have no
vices to satisfy, nor ambitions to appease. I am sure that you will
accommodate your life to your resources. The hardest thing for you
to bear, is the chagrin of that young woman who is as a daughter to
you. But you will give her courage and consolation, it is the moment
to be above your own worries, in order to assuage those of others. I
am sure that as I write, you have calmed her mind and soothed her
heart. Perhaps, too, the disaster is not what it seems at the first
moment. There will be a change for the better, a new way will be
found, for it is always so, and the worth of men is measured
according to their energy, to the hopes which are always a sign of
their force and intelligence. More than one has risen again bravely.
Be sure that better days will come and tell them so continually, for
it is true. Your moral and physical welfare must not be shaken by
this rebuff. Think of healing those whom you love, and forget
yourself. We shall be thinking of you, and we shall be suffering for
you; for I am keenly affected at seeing that you have a new subject
of sadness amidst your spleen.

Come, dear splendid old fellow, cheer up, do us a new successful
novel, and think of those who love you, and whose hearts are
saddened and torn by your discouragements. Love them, love us, and
you will find once more your strength and your enthusiasm.

We all embrace you very tenderly. Do not write if it bores you, say
to us only, "I am well, and I love you."

G. Sand



CCXCV. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday

Will you forgive my long delay, dear master? But I think that I must
bore you with my eternal jeremiads. I repeat myself like a dotard! I
am becoming too stupid! I am boring everybody. In short, your
Cruchard has become an intolerable old codger, because he has been
intolerant. And as I cannot do anything that I ought to do, I must,
out of consideration for others, spare them the overflow of my bile.

For the last six months, especially, I don't know what has been the
trouble with me, but I feel dreadfully ill, without being able to
get to the root of the matter, and I know many people are in the
same condition. Why? Perhaps we are suffering from the illness of
France; here in Paris, where her heart beats, people feel better
than at her extremities, in the provinces.

I assure you that every one now is suffering with some
incomprehensible trouble. Our friend Renan is one of the most
desperate, and Prince Napoleon feels exactly the way he does. But
they have strong nerves. But, as for me, I am attacked by a well
defined melancholia. I should be resigned to it, and I am not.

I work all the more, so as not to think about myself. But since I
have undertaken a book that has absurd difficulties in its
execution, the feeling of my powerlessness adds to my chagrin.

Don't tell me again that imbecility is sacred like childhood, for
imbecility contains no germ. Let me believe that the dead do not
"search any more," and that they are at rest. We are sufficiently
tormented on earth to be at rest when we are beneath it! Ah! How I
envy you, how I long to have your serenity! To say nothing of the
rest! and your two dear little girls, whom I embrace as tenderly as
I do--you.



CCXCVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 7th September, 1875

You are distressed, you are discouraged, you distress me too. That
is all right, I would rather have you complain than keep silent,
dear friend. And I don't want you to stop writing to me.

I also have great and frequent sorrows. My old friends are dying
before I do. One of the dearest, the one who brought up Maurice and
whom I was expecting to help me to bring up my grandchildren, has
just died, almost in an instant. That is a deep sorrow. Life is a
succession of blows at one's heart. But duty is there: we must go on
and do our tasks without saddening those who suffer with us.

I ask you absolutely to WILL, and not to be indifferent to the
griefs which we are sharing with you. Tell us that calm has   come
and that the horizon has cleared.

We love you, sad or gay.

Give us news of yourself.

G. Sand



CCXCVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 8th October, 1875

Well, well, your health has come back in spite of you, since you are
sleeping all night. The sea air forces you to live and   you have
made progress, you have given up a work that would not have made a
success. Do something more of earth earthy, which would reach
everybody. Tell me what price they would sell Croisset for if they
are obliged to sell it. Is it a house and garden, or is there a farm
and grounds! If it is not beyond my means I might buy it and you
should spend the rest of your life there. I have no money, but I
should try to shift a little capital. Answer me seriously, I beg of
you; if I can do it, it shall be done.

I have been ill all the summer, that is to say, that I have suffered
continually, but I have worked all the more not to think of it. In
fact they are to put on Villemer and Victorine at the Theatre
Francais again. But there is nothing now in preparation.  I do not
know at what time in the autumn or winter I shall have to go to
Paris. I shall find you there ready and courageous, shan't I? If you
have made, through goodness and devotion, as I think, a great
sacrifice for your niece, who, in truth, is your real daughter, you
will forget all about it and will begin your life again as a young
man. Is one old when one does not choose to be? Stay at the seaside
as long as you can. The important thing is to patch up the physical
machine. Here with us it is as warm as in midsummer. I hope that you
still have the sun down there. Study the life of the mollusc! They
are creatures better endowed than one thinks, and, for my part, I
should love to take a walk with Georges Pouchet! Natural history is
the inexhaustible source of agreeable occupations for even those who
seek only amusement in it, and if you actually attacked it you would
be saved. But you must by all means save yourself, for you are
somebody, and you cannot drop out of the running, as can a mere
ruined grocer. We all embrace you with our best love.

G. Sand



CCXCVIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 15 November, 1875

So you are there in Paris, and have you left your apartment at the
rue Murillo? You are working? Good luck and good courage! The old
man is coming to the top again! I know that they are rehearsing
Victorine at the Theatre Francais; but I don't know whether I shall
go to see that revival. I have been so ill all the summer and I am
still suffering so much with intestinal trouble, that I do not know
if I shall ever be strong enough to move in winter. Well, we shall
see. The hope of finding you there will give me courage; that is not
what will be lacking, but, since I passed my seventieth birthday, I
have been very much upset, and I do not yet know if I shall get over
it. I cannot walk any more, I who used to love to be on my feet so
much, without risking atrocious pains. I am patient with these
miseries, I work all the more, and I do water-colors in my hours of
recreation.

Aurore consoles and charms me; I should like to live long enough to
get her married. But God disposes, and one must   take death and
life as He wills.

Well, this is just to say to you that I shall go to embrace you
unless the thing is ABSOLUTELY impossible. You shall read me what
you have begun. Meanwhile, give me news of yourself; for I shall not
stir until the last rehearsals. I know my cast, I know that they
will all do well, according to their capabilities, and, besides,
that Perrin will look after them.

We all KISS you very tenderly, and we love you, Cruchard or not.

G. Sand



CCXCIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Paris, 11 December, 1875

Things are going a little better, and I am profiting by the occasion
to write to you, dear, good, adorable master.

You know that I have abandoned my big novel in order to write a
little MEDIEVAL bit of nonsense, which won't run to more  than
thirty pages. It puts me in a more decent setting than that of
modern times, and does me good. Then I am hunting for a contemporary
novel, but I am hesitating among several embryonic ideas; I should
like to do something concise and violent. The string of the necklace
(that is to say, the main idea) is still to seek.

Externally my life is scarcely changed: I see the same people, I
receive the same visits. My faithful ones on Sunday are first of
all, the big Tourgueneff, who is nicer than ever, Zola, Alphonse
Daudet, and Goncourt. You have never spoken to me of the first two.
What do you think of their books?

I am not reading anything at all, except Shakespeare, whom am going
through from beginning to end. That tones you up and puts new air
into your lungs, just as if you were on a high mountain. Everything
appears mediocre beside that prodigious felow.

As I go out very little, I have not yet seen Victor Hugo. However,
this evening I am going to resign myself to putting on my boots, so
that I can go to present my compliments to him. His personality
pleases me infinitely, but his court! ... mercy!

The senatorial elections are a subject of diversion to the public of
which I am a part. There must have occurred, in the corridors of the
Assembly, dialogues incredibly grotesque and base. The XlXth century
is destined to see all religions perish. Amen! I do not mourn any of
them.

At the Odeon, a live bear is going to appear on the boards. That is
all that I know about literature.



CCC. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 18th and 19th December, 1875

At last I discover my old troubadour who was a subject of chagrin
and serious worry to me. Here you are yourself again, trusting in
the very natural luck of external events, and discovering in
yourself the strength to control them, whatever they may be, by
effort. What is it that you call some one in HIGH FINANCE? For my
part, I don't know; I am in relations with Victor Borie. He will do
me a favor if he sees it to his interest. Must I write him?

Then you are going to start grubbing again? So am I; for since
Flamarande I have done nothing but mark time, while waiting for
something better. I was so ill all summer! but my strange and
excellent friend Favre has cured me wonderfully, and I am taking a
new lease on life.

What's our next move? For you, of course, DESOLATION, and, for me,
consolation. I do not know on what our destinies depend; you see
them pass, you criticise them, you abstain from a literary
appreciation of them, you limit yourself to depicting them, with
deliberate meticulous concealment of your personal feelings.
However, one sees them very clearly through your narrative, and you
make the people sadder who read you. As for me, I should like to
make them less sad. I cannot forget that my personal victory over
despair was the work of my will and of a new way of understanding
which is entirely opposed to what I had before.

I know that you criticise the intervention of the personal doctrine
in literature. Are you right? Isn't it rather a lack of conviction
than a principle of esthetics? One cannot have a philosophy in one's
soul without its appearing. I have no literary advice to give you, I
have no judgment to formulate on the author friends of whom you
speak. I, myself have told the Goncourts all my thought; as for the
others, I firmly believe that they have more education and more
talent than I have. Only I think that they, and you especially, lack
a definite and   extended vision of life. Art is not merely
painting. True painting, moreover, is full of the soul that wields
the brush. Art is not merely criticism and satire: criticism and
satire depict only one side of the truth.

I want to see a man as he is, he is not good or bad, he is good and
bad. But he is something more ... nuance. Nuance which is for me the
purpose of art, being good and bad, he has an internal force which
leads him to be very bad and slightly good,--or very good and
slightly bad.

I think that your school is not concerned with the substance, and
that it dwells too much on the surface. By virtue of seeking the
form, it makes the substance too cheap! it addresses  itself to the
men of letters. But there are no men of letters, properly speaking.
Before everything, one is a man. One wants to find man at the basis
of every story and every deed. That was the defect of l'Education
sentimentale, about which I have so often reflected since, asking
myself why there was so general a dislike of a work that was so well
done and so solid. This defect was the absence of ACTION of the
characters on themselves. They submitted to the event and never
mastered it. Well, I think that the chief interest in a story is
what you did not want to do. If I were you, I would try the
opposite; you are feeding on Shakespeare just now, and you are doing
well! He is the author who puts men at grips with events; observe
that by them, whether for good or for ill, the event is always
conquered. In his works, it is crushed underfoot.

Politics is a comedy just now. We have had tragedy, shall we end
with the opera or with the operetta? I read my paper conscientiously
every morning; but aside from that moment, it is impossible for me
to think of it or to be interested in it. All of it is absolutely
void of any ideal whatsoever, and therefore I cannot get up any
interest in any of the persons concerned in that scullery. All of
them are slaves of fact because they have been born slaves of
themselves.

My dear little girls are well. Aurore is a well-set-up girl, a
beautiful upright soul in a strong body. The other one is grace and
sweetness. I am always an assiduous and a patient teacher, and very
little time is left to me to write PROFESSIONALLY, seeing that I
cannot keep awake after midnight and that I want to spend all my
evening with my family; but this lack of time stimulates me and
makes me find a true pleasure in digging away; it is like a
forbidden fruit that I taste in secret.

All my dear world embraces you and rejoices to hear that you are
better. Did I send you Flamarande and the pictures of my little
girls? If not, send me a line, and I send you both.

Your old troubadour who loves you,

G. Sand

Embrace your charming niece for me. What a good and lovely letter
she wrote me! Tell her that I beg her to take care of herself and to
please get well quickly.

What do you mean! Littre a senator? It is impossible to believe it
when one knows what the Chamber is. All the same it must be
congratulated for this attempt at self-respect.



CCCI. TO GEORGE SAND
December, 1875

Your good letter of the 18th, so maternally tender, has made me
reflect a great deal. I have reread it ten times, and I shall
confess to you that I am not sure that I understand it. Briefly,
what do you want me to do? Make your instructions exact.

I am constantly doing all that I can to enlarge my brain, and I work
in the sincerity of my heart. The rest does not depend on me.

I do not enjoy making "desolation," believe me, but I cannot change
my eyes! As for my "lack of convictions," alas! I choke with
convictions. I am bursting with anger and restrained indignation.
But according to the ideal of art that I have, I think that the
artist should not manifest anything of his own feelings, and that
the artist should not appear any more in his work than God in
nature. The man is nothing, the work is everything! This method,
perhaps mistakenly conceived, is not easy to follow. And for me, at
least, it is a sort of permanent sacrifice that I am making to good
taste. It would be agreeable to me to say what I think and to
relieve Mister Gustave Flaubert by words, but of what importance is
the said gentleman?

I think as you do, dear master, that art is not merely criticism and
satire; moreover, I have never tried to do intentionally the one nor
the other. I have always tried to go into the soul of things and to
stick to the greatest generalities, and I have purposely turned
aside from the accidental and the dramatic. No monsters and no
heroes!

You say to me: "I have no literary advice to give you; I have no
judgments to formulate on the authors, your friends, etc." Well?
indeed! but I implore advice, and I am waiting for your judgments.
Who, pray, should give them, and who, pray, should formulate them,
if not you?

Speaking of my friends, you add "my school." But I am ruining my
temperament in trying not to have a school! A priori, I spurn them,
every one. The people whom I see often and whom you designate
cultivate all that I scorn and are indifferently disturbed about
what torments me. I regard as very secondary, technical detail,
local exactness, in short the historical and precise side of things.
I am seeking above all for beauty, which my companions pursue but
languidly. I see them insensible when I am ravaged with admiration
or horror. Phrases make me swoon with pleasure which seem very
ordinary to them. Goncourt is very happy when he has seized upon a
word in the street that he can stick in a book, and I am well
satisfied when I have written a page without assonances or
repetitions. I would give all the legends of Gavarni for certain
expressions and master strokes, such as "the shade was NUPTIAL,
august and solemn!" from Victor Hugo, or this from Montesquieu: "the
vices of Alexander were extreme like his virtues. He was terrible in
his wrath. It made him cruel."

In short, I try to think well, IN ORDER TO write well. But writing
well is my aim, I do not deny it.

"I lack a well-defined and extended vision of life." You are right a
thousand times over, but by what means could it be otherwise? I ask
you that. You do not enlighten my darkness with metaphysics, neither
mine nor that of others. The words religion or Catholicism on the
one hand; progress, fraternity, democracy on the other, do not
correspond to the spiritual needs of the moment. The entirely new
dogma of equality which radicalism praises is experimentally denied
by physiology and history. I do not see the means of establishing
today a new principle, any more than of respecting the old ones.
Therefore I am hunting, without finding it, that idea on which all
the rest should depend.

Meanwhile I repeat to myself what Littre said to me one day: "Ah! my
friend, man is an unstable compound, and the earth an inferior
planet."

Nothing sustains me better than the hope of leaving it soon, and of
not going to another which might be worse. "I would rather not die,"
as Marat said. Ah! no! enough, enough weariness!

I am writing now a little silly story, which a mother can permit her
child to read. The whole will be about thirty pages, I shall have
two months more at it. Such is my energy, I shall send it to you as
soon as it appears (not my energy, but the little story).



CCCII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, in Paris
Nohant, 12th January, 1876

My cherished Cruchard,

I want to write to you every day; time is lacking absolutely. At
last here is a free moment; we are buried under the snow; it is the
sort of weather that I adore: this whiteness is like general
purification, and the amusements of the house seem more intimate and
sweeter. Can anyone hate the winter in the country? The snow is one
of the most beautiful sights of the year!

It appears that I am not clear in my sermons; I have that much in
common with the orthodox, but I am not of them; neither in my idea
of equality, nor of authority, have I any fixed plan. You seem to
think that I want to convert you to a doctrine. Not at all, I don't
think of such a thing. Everyone sets off from a point of view, the
free choice of which I respect. In a few words, I can give a resume
of mine: not to place oneself behind an opaque glass through which
one can see only the reflection of one's own nose. To see as far as
possible the good, the bad, about, around, yonder, everywhere; to
perceive the continual gravitation of all tangible and intangible
things towards the necessity of the decent, the good, the true, the
beautiful.

I don't say that humanity is on the way to the heights. I believe it
in spite of everything; but I do not argue about it, it is useless
because each one judges according to his own personal vision, and
the general aspect is for the moment poor and ugly. Besides, I do
not need to be sure of the safety of the planet and its inhabitants
in order to believe in the necessity of the good and the beautiful;
if the planet departs from that law it will perish; if the
inhabitants discard it they will be destroyed. Other stars, other
souls will pass over their bodies, so much the worse! But, as for
me, I want to gravitate up to my last breath, not with the certitude
nor the need of finding elsewhere a GOOD PLACE, but because my sole
joy is in keeping myself with my family on an upward road.

In other words, I am fleeing the sewer, and I am seeking the dry and
the clean, certain that it is the law of my existence. Being a man
amounts to little; we are still near the monkey from which they say
we proceed. Very well! a further reason for separating ourselves
still more from it and for being at least at the height of the
relative truth that our race has been admitted to comprehend; a very
poor truth, very limited, very humble! well, let us possess it as
much as we can and not permit anyone to take it from us. We are, I
think, quite agreed; but I practice this simple religion and you do
not practice it, since you let yourself become discouraged; your
heart has not been penetrated with it, since you curse life and
desire death like a Catholic who yearns for compensation, were it
only the rest eternal. You are no surer than another of this
compensation. Life is perhaps eternal, and therefore work is
eternal. If this is so, let us do our day's work bravely. If it is
otherwise, if the MOI perishes entirely, let us have the honor of
having done our stated task, it is our duty; for we have evident
duties only toward ourselves and our equals. What we destroy in
ourselves, we destroy in them. Our abasement lowers them, our falls
drag them down; we owe it to them to remain erect so that they shall
not fall. The desire for an early death, as that for a long life, is
therefore a weakness, and I do not want you to admit any longer that
it is a right. I thought that had it once; I believed, however, what
I believe today; but I lacked strength, and like you I said: "I
cannot help it." I lied to myself. One can help everything. One has
the strength that one thinks one has not, when one desires ardently
to GRAVITATE, to mount a step each day, to say to oneself: "The
Flaubert of tomorrow must be superior to the one of yesterday, and
the one of day after tomorrow more steady and more lucid still."

When you feel you are on the ladder, you will mount very quickly.
You are about to enter gradually upon the happiest and most
favorable time of life: old age. It is then that art reveals itself
in its sweetness; as long as one is young, it manifests itself with
anguish. You prefer a well-turned phrase to all metaphysics. I also,
I love to see condensed into a few words what elsewhere fills
volumes; but these volumes, one must have understood them completely
(either to admit them or to reject them) in order to find the
sublime resume which becomes literary art in its fullest expression;
that is why one should not scorn the efforts of the human mind to
arrive at the truth.

I tell you that, because you have excessive prejudices AS TO WORDS.
In truth, you read, you dig, you work much more than I and a crowd
of others do. You have acquired learning that I shall never attain.
Therefore you are a hundred times richer than all of us; you are a
rich man, and you complain like a poor man. Be charitable to a
beggar who has his mattress full of gold, but who wants to be
nourished only on well-turned phrases and choice words. But brute,
ransack your own mattress and eat your gold. Nourish yourself with
the ideas and feelings accumulated in your head and your heart; the
words and the phrases, THE FORM to which you attach so much
importance, will issue by itself from your digestion. You consider
it as an end, it is only an effect. Happy manifestations proceed
only from an emotion, and an emotion proceeds only from a
conviction. One is not moved at all by the things that one does not
believe with all one's heart.

I do not say that you do not believe: on the contrary, all your life
of affection, of protection, and of charming and simple goodness,
proves that you are the most convinced individual in the world. But,
as soon as you handle literature, you want, I don't know why, to be
another man, one who should disappear, one who destroys himself, who
does not exist! What an absurd mania! what a false rule of GOOD
TASTE! Our work is worth only what we are worth.

Who is talking about putting yourself on the stage? That, in truth,
is of no use, unless it is done frankly by way of a chronicle. But
to withdraw one's soul from what one does, what is that unhealthy
fancy? To hide one's own opinion about the characters that one puts
on the stage, to leave the reader therefore uncertain about the
opinion that he should have of them, that is to desire not to be
understood, and from that moment, the reader leaves you; for if he
wants to understand the story that you are telling him, it is on the
condition that you should show him plainly that this one is a strong
character and that one weak.

L'Education sentimentale has been a misunderstood book, as I have
told you repeatedly, but you have not listened to me. There should
have been a short preface, or, at a good opportunity, an expression
of blame, even if only a happy epithet to condemn the evil, to
characterize the defect, to signalize the effort. All the characters
in that book are feeble and come to nothing, except those with bad
instincts; that is what you are reproached with, because people did
not understand that you wanted precisely to depict a deplorable
state of society that encourages these bad instincts and ruins noble
efforts; when people do not understand us it is always our fault.
What the reader wants, first of all, is to penetrate into our
thought, and that is what you deny him, arrogantly. He thinks that
you scorn him and that you want to ridicule him. For my part, I
understood you, for I knew you. If anyone had brought me your book
without its being signed, I should have thought it beautiful, but
strange, and I should have asked myself if you were immoral,
skeptical, indifferent or heart-broken. You say that it ought to be
like that, and that M. Flaubert will violate the rules of good taste
if he shows his thought and the aim of his literary enterprise. It
is false in the highest degree. When M. Flaubert writes well and
seriously, one attaches oneself to his personality. One wants to
sink or swim with him. If he leaves you in doubt, you lose interest
in his work, you neglect it, or you give it up.

I have already combated your favorite heresy, which is that one
writes for twenty intelligent people and does not care a fig for the
rest. It is not true, since the lack of success irritates you and
troubles you. Besides, there have not been twenty critics favorable
to this book which was so well written and so important. So one must
not write for twenty persons any more than for three, or for a
hundred thousand.

One must write for all those who have a thirst to read and who can
profit by good reading. Then one must go straight to the most
elevated morality within oneself, and not make a mystery of the
moral and profitable meaning of one's book. People found that with
Madame Bovary. If one part of the public cried scandal, the
healthiest and the broadest part saw in it a severe and striking
lesson given to a woman without conscience and without faith, to
vanity, to ambition, to irrationality. They pitied her; art required
that, but the lesson was clear, and it would have been more so, it
would have been so for everybody, if you had wished it, if you had
shown more clearly the opinion that you had, and that the public
ought to have had, about the heroine, her husband, and her lovers.

That desire to depict things as they are, the adventures of life as
they present themselves to the eye, is not well thought out, in my
opinion. Depict inert things as a realist, as a poet, it's all the
same to me, but, when one touches on the emotions of the human
heart, it is another thing. You cannot abstract yourself from this
contemplation; for man, that is yourself, and men, that is the
reader. Whatever you do, your tale is a conversation between you and
the reader. If you show him the evil coldly, without ever showing
him the good he is angry. He wonders if it is he that is bad, or if
it is you. You work, however, to rouse him and to interest him; you
will never succeed if you are not roused yourself, or if you hide it
so well that he thinks you indifferent. He is right: supreme
impartiality is an anti-human thing, and a novel ought to be human
above everything. If it is not, the public is not pleased in its
being well written, well composed and conscientious in every detail.
The essential quality is not there: interest. The reader breaks away
likewise from a book where all the characters are good without
distinctions and without weaknesses; he sees clearly that that is
not human either. I believe that art, this special art of narration,
is only worth while through the opposition of characters; but, in
their struggle, I prefer to see the right prevail. Let events
overwhelm the honest men, I agree to that, but let him not be soiled
or belittled by them, and let him go to the stake feeling that he is
happier than his executioners.

15th January, 1876

It is three days since I wrote this letter, and every day I have
been on the point of throwing it into the fire; for it is long and
diffuse and probably useless. Natures opposed on certain points
understand each other with difficulty, and I am afraid that you will
not understand me any better today than formerly. However, I am
sending you this scrawl so that you can see that I am occupied with
you almost as much as with myself.

You must have success after that bad luck which has troubled you
deeply. I tell you wherein lie the certain conditions for your
success. Keep your cult for form; but pay more attention to the
substance. Do not take true virtue for a commonplace in literature.
Give it its representative, make honest and strong men pass among
the fools and the imbeciles that you love to ridicule. Show what is
solid at the bottom of these intellectual abortions; in short,
abandon the convention of the realist and return to the time
reality, which is a mingling of the beautiful and the ugly, the dull
and the brilliant, but in which the desire of good finds its place
and its occupation all the same.

I embrace you for all of us.

G. Sand



CCCIII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Nohant, 6th March, 1876

I am writing to you in a hurry this morning because I have just
received news from M. Perrin of the first performance of the revival
of the Mariage de Victorine, a play of mine, at the Theatre
Francais.

I have neither the time to go there, nor the wish to leave like that
at a moment's notice, but I should have liked to send some of my
friends there, and he does not offer me a single seat for them. I am
writing him a letter that he will receive tomorrow, and I am asking
him to send you at least one orchestra seat. If you do not get it,
please understand that it was not my fault. I shall have to say the
same thing to five or six other people.

I embrace you therefore in a hurry, so as not to lose the post.

Give me news of your niece and embrace her for me.

G. Sand



CCCIV. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Paris
Nohant, 8th March, 1876

You scorn Sedaine, you great profane soul! That is where the
doctrine of form destroys your eye! Sedaine is not a writer, that is
true, although he falls but little short of it, but he is a man,
with a heart and soul, with the sense of moral truth, the direct
insight into human feelings. I don't mind his out-of-date reasonings
and dry phraseology! The right thought is always there, and it
penetrates you deeply!

My dear old Sedaine! He is one of my well-beloved papas, and I
consider le Philosophe sans le savior far superior to Victorine; it
is such a distressing drama and so well carried out! But you only
look for the well-turned phrase, that is one thing--only one thing,
it is not all of art, it is not even half of it, it is a quarter at
most, and if three-quarters are beautiful, one overlooks the part
that is not.

I hope that you will not go to seek for your country-side before the
good weather; here, we have been pretty well spared; but for the
past three days there has been a deluge, and it makes me ill. I
should not have been able to go to Paris. Your niece is better, God
be praised! I love you and I embrace you with all my soul.

G. Sand

Do tell M. Zola to send me his book. I shall certainly read it with
great interest.



CCCV. TO GEORGE SAND
Wednesday, 9th March, 1876

COMPLETE SUCCESS, dear master. The actors were recalled after each
act, and warmly applauded. The public was pleased and from time to
time cries of approval were heard. All your friends who had come at
your summons were sorry that you were not there.

The roles of Antoine and Victorine were especially well played.
Little Baretta is a real treasure.

How were you able to make Victorine from le Philosophe sans le
savoir? That is beyond me. Your play charmed me and made me weep
like an idiot, while the other bored me to death, absolutely bored
me to death; I longed to get to the end. What language! the good
Tourgueneff and Madame Viardot made saucer-eyes, comical to behold.
In your work, what produced the greatest effect is the scene in the
last act between Antoine and his daughter. Maubant is too majestic,
and the actor who plays Fulgence is inadequate. But everything went
very well, and this revival will have a long life.

The gigantic Harrisse told me that he was going to write to you
immediately. Therefore his letter will arrive before mine. I should
have started this morning for Pont-l'Eveque and Honfleur to see a
bit of the country that I have forgotten, but the floods stopped me.

Read, I beg of you, the new novel by Zola, Son Excellence Rougon: I
am very anxious to know what you think of it.

No, I do not SCORN Sedaine, because I do not scorn what I do not
understand. He is to me, like Pindar, and Milton, who are absolutely
closed to me; however, I quite understand that the citizen Sedaine
is not exactly of their calibre.

The public of last Tuesday shared my error, and Victorine,
independently of its real worth, gained by contrast. Madame Viardot,
who has naturally good taste, said to me yesterday, in speaking of
you: "How was she able to make one from the other?" That is exactly
what I think.

You distress me a bit, dear master, by attributing esthetic opinions
to me which are not mine. I believe that the rounding of the phrase
is nothing. But that WRITING WELL is everything, because "writing
well is at the same time perceiving well, thinking well and saying
well" (Buffon). The last term is then dependent on the other two,
since one has to feel strongly, so as to think, and to think, so as
to express.

All the bourgeois can have a great deal of heart and delicacy, be
full of the best sentiments and the greatest virtues, without
becoming for all that, artists. In short, I believe that the form
and the matter are two subtleties, two entities, neither of which
can exist without the other.

This anxiety for external beauty which you reproach me with is for
me a METHOD. When I discover a bad assonance or a repetition in one
of my phrases, I am sure that I am floundering in error; by dint of
searching, I find the exact expression which was the only one and
is, at the same time, the harmonious one. The word is never lacking
when one possesses the idea.

Note (to return to the good Sedaine) that I share all his opinions
and I approve his tendencies. From the archeological point of view,
he is curious and from the humanitarian point of view very
praiseworthy, I agree. But what difference does it make to us today?
Is it eternal art? I ask you that.

Other writers of his period have formulated useful principles also,
but in an imperishable style, in a more concrete and at the same
time more general manner.

In short, the persistence of the Comedie Francais in exhibiting that
to us as "a masterpiece" had so exasperated me that, having gone
home in order to get rid of the taste of this milk-food, I read
before going to bed the Medea of Euripides, as I had no other
classic handy, and Aurora surprised Cruchard in this occupation.

I have written to Zola to send you his book. I shall tell Daudet
also to send you his Jack, as I am very curious to have your opinion
on these two books, which are very different in composition and
temperament, but quite remarkable, both of them.

The fright which the elections caused to the bourgeois has been
diverting.



CCCVI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT, at Croissset
Nohant, 15th March, 1876

I should have a good deal to say about the novels of M. Zola, and it
would be better to say it in an article than in a letter, because
there is a general question there which must be formulated with a
refreshed brain. I should like to read M. Daudet's book first, the
book you spoke of to me, the title of which I cannot recall. Have
the publisher send it to me collect, if he does not want to give it
to me; that is very simple. On the whole, the thing that I shall not
gainsay, meanwhile making a PHILOSOPHICAL criticism of the method,
is that Rougon is a STRONG book, as you say, and worthy of being
placed in the first rank.

That does not change anything in my way of thinking, that art ought
to be the search for the truth, and that truth is not the picture of
evil. It ought to be the picture of good and evil. A painter who
sees only one is as false as he who sees only the other. Life is not
crammed with monsters only. Society is not formed of rascals and
wretches only. The honest people are not the minority, since society
exists in a certain order and without too many unpunished crimes.
Imbeciles dominate, it is true, but there is a public conscience
which weighs on them and obliges them to respect the right. Let
people show up and chastise the rascals, that is good, it is even
moral, but let them tell us and show us the opposite; otherwise the
simple reader, who is the average reader, is discouraged, saddened,
horrified, and contradicts you so as not to despair.

How are you? Tourgueneff wrote me that your last work was very
remarkable: then you are not DONE FOR, as you pretend?

Your niece continues to improve, does she not? I too am better,
after cramps in my stomach that made me blue, and continued with a
horrible persistence. Physical suffering is a good lesson when it
leaves one freedom of spirit. One learns to endure it and to conquer
it. Of course one has some moments of discouragement when one throws
oneself on the bed; but, for my part, I always think of what my old
cure used to say to me, when he had the gout: THAT WILL PASS, OR I
SHALL PASS. And thereupon he would laugh, content with his joke.

My Aurore is beginning history, and she is not very well pleased
with these killers of men whom they call heroes and demigods. She
calls them horrid fellows.

We have a confounded spring; the earth is covered with flowers and
snow, one gets numb gathering violets and anemones.

I have read the manuscript of l'Etrangere. It is not as DECADENT as
you say. There are diamonds that sparkle brightly in this
polychrome. Moreover, the decadences are transformations. The
mountains in travail roar and scream, but they sing beautiful airs,
also.

I embrace you and I love you. Do have your legend published quickly,
so that we may read it.

Your old troubadour,

G. Sand



CCCVII. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
30th March, 1876

Dear Cruchard,

I am enthusiastic about Jack, and I beg you to send my thanks to M.
Daudet. Ah, yes! He has talent and heart! and how well all that is
done and SEEN!

I am sending you a volume of old things that have just been
collected. I embrace you, and I love you.

Your old troubadour,

G. Sand



CCCVIII. TO GEORGE SAND
Monday evening, 3rd April, 1876

I have received your volume this morning, dear master. I have two or
three others that have been loaned to me for a long time; I shall
send them off, and I shall read yours at the end of the week, during
a little two-days' trip that I am forced to take to Pont-l'Eveque
and to Honfleur for my Histoire d'un coeur simple, a trifle now "on
the stocks," as M. Prudhomme would say.

I am very glad that Jack has pleased you. It is a charming book,
isn't it? If you knew the author you would like him even better than
his book. I have told him to send you Risler and Tartarin. I am sure
in advance that you would thank me for the opportunity of reading
these two books.

I do not share in Tourgueneff's severity as regards Jack, nor in the
immensity of his admiration for Rougon. The one has charm, the other
force. But neither one is concerned ABOVE ALL else with what is for
me the end of art, namely, beauty. I remember having felt my heart
beat violently, having felt a fierce pleasure in contemplating a
wall of the Acropolis, a perfectly bare wall (the one on the left as
you go up to the Propylaea). Well! I wonder if a book independently
of what it says, cannot produce the same effect! In the exactness of
its assembling, the rarity of its elements, the polish of its
surface, the harmony of its ensemble, is there not an intrinsic
virtue, a sort of divine force, something eternal as a principle? (I
speak as a Platonist.) Thus, why is a relation necessary between the
exact word and the musical word? Why does it happen that one always
makes a verse when one restrains his thought too much? Does the law
of numbers govern then the feelings and the images, and is what
seems to be the exterior quite simply inside it? If I should
continue a long time in this vein, I should blind myself entirely,
for on the other side art has to be a good fellow; or rather art is
what one can make it, we are not free. Each one follows his path, in
spite of his own desire. In short, your Cruchard no longer knows
where he stands.

But how difficult it is to understand one another! There are two men
whom I admire a great deal and whom I consider real artists,
Tourgueneff and Zola. Yet they do not admire the prose of
Chateaubriand at all, and even less that of Gautier. Phrases which
ravish me seem hollow to them. Who is wrong? And how please the
public when one's nearest friends are so remote? All that saddens me
very much. Do not laugh.



CCCIX. TO GEORGE SAND
Sunday evening... 1876

You OUGHT to call me inwardly, dear master, "a confounded pig,"--for
I have not answered your last letter, and I have said nothing to you
about your two volumes, not to mention a third that I received this
morning from you. But I have been, for the last two weeks, entirely
taken up by my little tale which will be finished soon. I have had
several errands to do, various readings to finish up with, and a
thing more serious than all that, the health of my poor niece
worries me extremely and, at times, disturbs my brain, so that I do
not know at all what I am doing! You see that my cup is bitter! That
young woman is anemic to the last degree. She is wasting away. She
has been obliged to leave off painting, which is her sole
distraction. All the usual tonics do no good. Three days ago, by the
orders of another physician, who seems to me more learned than the
others, she began hydrotherapy. Will he succeed in making her digest
and sleep? in building up her strength? Your poor Cruchard takes
less and less pleasure in life, and he even has too much of it,
infinitely too much. Let us speak of your books, that will be
better.

They have amused me, and the proof is that I have devoured with one
gulp and one after another, Flamarande and the Deux Freres. What a
charming woman is Madame Flamarande, and what a man is M. Salcede.
The narrative of the kidnapping of the child, the trip in the
carriage, and the story of Zamora are perfect passages. Everywhere
the interest is sustained and at the same time progressive. In
short, what strikes me the most in these two novels (as in all
yours, moreover), is the natural order of the ideas, the talent, or
rather the genius for narrative. But what an abominable wretch is
your M. Flamarande! As for the servant who tells the story and who
is evidently in love with Madame, I wonder why you did not show more
plainly his personal jealousy.

Except for the count, all are virtuous persons in that story, even
extraordinarily virtuous. But do you think them really true to life?
Are there many like them? It is true that while reading, one accepts
them because of the cleverness of the execution; but afterwards?

Well, dear master, and this is to answer your last letter, this is,
I think what separates us essentially. You, on the first bound, in
everything, mount to heaven, and from there you descend to the
earth. You start from a priori, from the theory, from the ideal.
Thence your pity for life, your serenity, and to speak truly, your
greatness.--I, poor wretch, I am stuck on the earth as with soles of
lead; everything disturbs me, tears me to pieces, ravages me, and I
make efforts to rise. If I should take your manner of looking at the
whole of life I should become laughable, that is all. For you preach
to me in vain. I cannot have another temperament than my own; nor
another esthetics than what is the consequence of it. You accuse me
of not letting myself go, according to nature. Well, and that
discipline? that virtue? what shall we do with it? I admire M.
Buffon putting on cuffs when he wrote. This luxury is a symbol. In
short I am trying simply to be as comprehensive as possible. What
more can one exact?

As for letting my personal opinion be known about the people I put
on the stage: no, no, a thousand times no! I do not recognize the
right to that. If the reader does not draw from a book the moral
that should be found there, the reader is an imbecile or the book is
false from the point of view of accuracy. For, the moment that a
thing is true, it is good. Obscene books likewise are immoral only
because they lack truth. Things are not "like that" in life.

And observe that I curse what they agree to call realism, although
they make me one of its high priests; reconcile all that.

As for the public, its taste disgusts me more and more. Yesterday,
for instance, I was present at the first night of the Prix Martin, a
piece of buffoonery that, for my part, I think full of wit. Not one
of the witty things in the play produced a laugh, and the
denouement, which seems out of the ordinary, passed unperceived.
Then to look for what can please seems to me the most chimerical of
undertakings. For I defy anyone to tell me by what means one
pleases. Success is a consequence and must not be an end. I have
never sought it (although I desire it) and I seek it less and less.

After my little story, I shall do another,--for I am too deeply
shaken to start on a great work. I had thought first of publishing
Saint-Julien in a periodical, but I have given the plan up.



CCCX. TO GEORGE SAND
Friday evening...1876

Ah! thank you from the bottom of my heart, dear master! You have
made me pass an exquisite day, for I have read your last volume, la
Tour de Percemont.--Marianne only to-day; as I had many things to
finish, among others my tale of Saint-Julien, I had shut up the
aforesaid volume in a drawer so as not to succumb to the temptation.
As my little story was finished last night, I rushed upon your book
when morning came and devoured it.

I find it perfect, two jewels! Marianne moved me deeply and two or
three times I wept. I recognized myself in the character of Pierre.
Certain pages seemed to me fragments of my own memoirs, supposing I
had the talent to write them in such a way! How charming, poetic and
true to life all that is! La Tour de Percemont pleased me extremely.
But Marianne literally enchanted me. The English think as I do, for
in the last number of the Athenaeum there is a very fine article
about you. Did you know that? So then, for this time, I admire you
completely and without the least reserve.

There you are, and I am very glad of it. You have never done
anything to me that was not good; I love you tenderly!



CCCXI. TO GUSTAVE FLAUBERT
Sunday, Nohant, 5th April, 1876.

Victor Borie is in Italy, what must I write him? Are you the man to
go to find him and explain the affair to him? He is somewhere near
Civita-Vecchia, very much on the go and perhaps not easy to catch up
with.

I am sure that he would receive you with open arms, for, although a
financier to his finger-tips he has remained very friendly and nice
to us. He does not tell us if he is on his mountain of alum for
long. Lina is writing to him and will know soon, shall she tell him
that you are disposed to go to meet him, or that you will wait until
his return to Paris? anyway until the 20th of May he will get
letters addressed to him at the Hotel Italy in Florence. We shall
have to be on the watch, for he writes AT LONG INTERVALS.

I have not the time to say any more to you today. People are coming
in. I have read Fromont et Risler; I charge you to thank M. Daudet,
to tell him that I spent the night in reading it and that I do not
know whether I prefer Jack or Risler; it is interesting, I might
almost say GRIPPING.

I embrace you and I love you, when will you give me some Flaubert to
read?

G. Sand



CCCXII. To GEOBGE SAND
Monday evening

Dear master,  Thanks to Madame Lina's kind note, I betook myself to
V. Borie's yesterday and was most pleasantly received. My nephew
went to carry him the documents today. Borie has promised to look
after the affair; will he do it?

I think that he is in just the position to do me indirectly the
greatest service that any one could do me. If my poor nephew should
get the capital which he needs in order to work, I could get back a
part of what I have lost and live in peace the rest of my days.

I presented myself to Borie under your recommendation, and it is to
you that I owe the cordiality of his reception. I do not thank you
(of course) but you can tell him that I was touched by his kind
reception (and stimulate his zeal if you think that may be useful).

I have been working a great deal lately. How I should like to see
you so as to read my little medieval folly to you! I have begun
another story entitled Histoire d'un coeur simple. But I have
interrupted this work to make some researches on the period of Saint
John the Baptist, for I want to describe the feast of Herodias.

I hope to have my readings finished in a fortnight, after which I
shall return to Croisset from which spot I shall not budge till
winter,--my long sessions at the library exhaust me. Cruchard is
weary.

The good Tourgueneff leaves this evening for Saint Petersburg. He
asks me if I have thanked you for your last book? Could I be guilty
of such an oversight?  You will see by my Histoire d'un coeur simple
where you will recognize your immediate influence, that I am not so
obstinate as you think. I believe that the moral tendency, or rather
the human basis of this little work will please you!

Adieu, dear good master. Remembrances to all yours.

I embrace you very tenderly.

Your old Gustave Flaubert



CCCXIII. To MAURICE SAND
Tuesday evening, 27th

All I can say to you, in the first place, my dear friend, is, that
your book has made me pass a sleepless night. I read it instantly,
at one fell swoop, only stopping to fill my good pipe from time to
time and then to resume my reading.

When the impression is a little less fresh I shall take up your book
again to find the flaws in it. But I think that there are very few.
You must be content? It ought to please? It is dramatic and as
amusing as possible!

Beginning with the first page I was charmed with the sincerity of
the description. And at the end I admired the composition of the
whole, the logical way the events were worked out and the characters
related.

Your chief character, Miss Mary, is too hateful (to my taste) to be
anything but an exact picture. That is one of the choicest parts of
your book, together with the homelife, the life in New York?

Your good savage makes me laugh out loud when he is at the Opera.

I was struck by the house of the missionaries (Montaret's first
night). You make it seem real.  Naissa scalping, and then wiping her
hands on the grass, seemed to me especially well done. As well as
the disgust that she inspires in Montaret,

I venture a timid observation: it seems to me that the flight of
father Athanasius and of Montaret, when they escape from their
prison, is not perfectly clear? Is not the material explanation of
the event too short?

I do not care for, as language, two or three ready-made locutions,
such as "break the ice." You can see that I have read you
attentively! What a pedagogue I make, eh! I am telling you all that
from memory, for I have lent your book, and it has not been returned
to me yet. But my recollection of it is of a thing very well done.

Don't you agree with me that a play of very great effect could be
made from it for a boulevard theatre?

By the way, how is Cadio going?

Tell your dear mamma that I adore her.

Harrisse, from whom I have received a letter today, charges me to
remember him to her, and, for my part, I charge you to embrace her
for me.

And I grasp your two hands heartily and say "bravo" to you again,
and faithfully yours.

Gustave Flaubert



CCCXIV. To MADAM MAURICE SAND
Thursday evening, 25th May, 1876

Dear Madam,

I sent a telegram to Maurice this morning, asking for news of Madam
Sand.

I was told yesterday that she was very ill, why has not Maurice
answered me?

I went to Plauchut's this morning to get details. He is in the
country, at Le Mans, so that I am in a state of cruel uncertainty.

Be good enough to answer me immediately and believe me, dear madam,

Your very affectionate,

Gustave Flaubert

4 rue Murillo, Parc Monceau



CCCXV. To MADAM LINA SAND

Dear Madam,

Your note of this morning reassures me a little. But that of last
night had absolutely upset me.

I beg you to give me very frequent news of your dear mother-in-law.

Embrace her for me and believe that I am

Your very devoted

Gustave Flaubert

Beginning with the middle of next week, about Wednesday or Thursday,
I shall be at Croisset.

Saturday morning, 3d June, 1876.



CCCXVI. To MAURICE SAND
Croisset, Sunday, 24 June, 1876

You had prepared me, my dear Maurice, I wanted to write to you, but
I was waiting till you were a little freer, more alone. Thank you
for your kind thought.

Yes, we understood each other, yonder! (And if I did not remain
longer, it is because my comrades dragged me away.) It seemed to me
that I was burying my mother the second time. Poor, dear, great
woman! What genius and what heart! But she lacked nothing, it is not
she whom we must pity.

What is to become of you? Shall you stay in Nohant? That good old
house must seem horribly empty to you! But you, at least, are not
alone! You have a wife...a rare one! and two exquisite children.
While I was with you, I had, over and above my grief, two desires:
to run off with Aurore and to kill M. Marx.[Footnote: A reporter for
le Figaro.] There you have the truth, it is unnecessary to make you
see the psychology of the thing. I received yesterday a very
sympathetic letter from good Tourgueneff. He too loved her. But
then, who did not love her? If you had seen in Paris the anguish of
Martine![Footnote: George Sand's maid.] That was distressing.

Plauchut is still in Nohant, I suppose. Tell him that I love him
because I saw him shed so many tears.

And let yours flow, my dear friend, do all that is necessary not to
console yourself,--which would, moreover, be impossible. Never mind!
In a short time you will feel a great joy in the idea alone that you
were a good son and that she knew it absolutely. She used to talk of
you as of a blessing.

And when you shall have rejoined her, when the great-grand-children
of the grandchildren of your two little girls shall have joined her,
and when for a long time there shall have been no question of the
things and the people that surround us,--in several centuries,--
hearts like ours will palpitate through hers! People will read her
books, that is to say that they will think according to her ideas
and they will love with her love. But all that does not give her
back to you, does it? With what then can we sustain ourselves if
pride desert us, and what man more than you should have pride in his
mother!

Now dear friend, adieu! When shall we meet now? How I should feel
the need of talking of her, insatiably!

Embrace Madam Maurice for me, as I did on the stairway at Nohant,
and your little girls.

Yours, from the depths of my heart,

Your Gustave Flaubert



CCCXVII. To MAURICE SAND
Croisset, Tuesday, 3rd October, 1876

Thank you for your kind remembrance, my dear friend. Neither do I
forget, and I dream of your poor, dear mamma in a sadness that does
not disappear. Her death has left a great emptiness for me. After
you, your wife and the good Plauchut, I am perhaps the one who
misses her most! I need her.

I pity you the annoyances that your sister causes you. I too have
gone through that! It is so easy moreover to be good! Besides that
causes less evil. When shall we meet? I want so much to see you,
first just to see you--and second to talk of her.

When your business is finished, why not come to Paris for some time?
Solitude is bad under certain conditions. One should not become
intoxicated with one's grief, however much attraction one finds in
doing so.

You ask me what I am doing. This is it: this year I have written two
stories, and I am going to begin another so as to make the three
into one volume that I want to publish in the spring. After that I
hope to resume the big novel that I laid aside a year ago after my
financial disaster. Matters are improving in that direction, and I
shall not be forced to change anything in my way of living. If I
have been able to start at work again, I owe it partly to the good
counsel of your mother. She had found the best way to bring me back
to respect myself.

In order to get the quicker at work, I shall stay here till New
Year's Day,--perhaps later than that. Do try to put off your visit
to Paris.

Embrace your dear little girls warmly for me, my respects to Madam
Maurice, and-sincerely yours, ex imo.

Gustave Flaubert



CCCXVIII. To MAURICE SAND
Saint-Gratien par Sannois, 20th August, 1877

Thank you for your kind remembrance, my dear Maurice. Next winter
you will be in Passy, I hope,--and from time to time we can have a
good chat. I even count on seeing myself at your table by the side
of your friends whose "idol" I am.

You speak to me of your dear and illustrious mamma! Next to you I do
not think that any one could think of her more often than I do! How
I miss her! How I need her!

I had begun un coeur simple solely on account of her, only to please
her. She died while I was in the midst of this work. Thus it is with
our dreams.

I still continue not to find diversion in existence. In order to
forget the weight of it, I work as frantically as possible.

What sustains me is the indignation that the Imbecility of the
Bourgeois affords me! Summed up at present by the large party of law
and order, it reaches a dizzy height!

Has there been anything in history more inept than the 16th of May?
Where is there an idiot comparable to the Bayard of modern times?

I have been in Paris, or rather at Saint-Gratien, for three days.
Day after tomorrow I leave the princess, and in a fortnight I shall
make a little trip to Lower Normandy for the sake of literature.
When we meet I shall talk a long time with you, if you are
interested, about the terrible book that I am in the process of
concocting. I shall have enough work in it to take me three or four
years. Not less!

Don't leave me so long without news. Give a long look for me at the
little corner of the holy ground!...My regards to your dear wife,
embrace the dear little girls and sincerely yours, my good Maurice,

Your old friend

Gustave Flaubert



CCCXIX. To MAURICE SAND
Tuesday morning, April, 1880

My dear Maurice,

No! Erase Cruchard and Polycarp and replace those words by what you
like.

The Public ought not to have all of us,--let us reserve something
for ourselves. That seems to me more decent (quod decet). You do not
speak of a COMPLETE EDITION? Ah! your poor dear mamma! How often I
think of her! And what need I have of her! There is not a day when I
do not say: "If she were there, I should ask her advice."

I shall be at Croisset till the 8th or the 10th of May. So, my old
fellow, when you wish to come there, you will be welcome. I embrace
you all from the oldest to the youngest.

Cruchard for you,

Polycarp for the human race,

Gustave Flaubert for Literature



THE END OF THE GEORGE SAND-GUSTAVE FLAUBERT LETTERS






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The George Sand-Gustave Flaubert
Letters, Translated by A.L. McKensie

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SAND-FLAUBERT LETTERS ***

This file should be named 5115.txt or 5115.zip

Produced by Steve Harris, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Devil's Pool, by George Sand

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Devil's Pool

Author: George Sand

Release Date: July 4, 2004 [EBook #12816]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEVIL'S POOL ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Wilelmina Mallière and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE ROMANCISTS

GEORGE SAND

THE DEVIL'S POOL

[Illustration: Chapter V

_He saw my little Marie watching her three sheep on the common land_. ]






BIBLIOTHÈQUE DES CHEFS-D'OEUVRE

DU ROMAN CONTEMPORAIN

_THE DEVIL'S POOL_

GEORGE SAND

PRINTED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY BY GEORGE BARRIE & SONS, Philadelphia

COPYRIGHT, 1901, BY GEORGE BARRIE & SON




THIS EDITION OF

THE DEVIL'S POOL

HAS BEEN COMPLETELY TRANSLATED

BY

GEORGE B. IVES

THE ETCHINGS AND DRAWINGS ARE BY

EDMOND RUDAUX




NOTICE


When I began, with _The Devil's Pool_, a series of rustic pictures which
I proposed to collect under the title of _The Hemp-Beater's Tales_, I
had no theory, no purpose to effect a revolution in literature. No one
can bring about a revolution by himself alone, and there are
revolutions, especially in matters of art, which mankind accomplishes
without any very clear idea how it is done, because everybody takes a
hand in them. But this is not applicable to the romance of rustic
manners: it has existed in all ages and under all forms, sometimes
pompous, sometimes affected, sometimes artless. I have said, and I say
again here: the dream of a country-life has always been the ideal of
cities, aye, and of courts. I have done nothing new in following the
incline that leads civilized man back to the charms of primitive life. I
have not intended to invent a new language or to create a new style. I
have been assured of the contrary in a large number of _feuilletons_,
but I know better than any one what to think about my own plans, and I
am always astonished that the critics dig so deep for them, when the
simplest ideas, the most commonplace incidents, are the only
inspirations to which the products of art owe their being. As for _The
Devil's Pool_ in particular, the incident that I have related in the
preface, an engraving of Holbein's that had made an impression upon me,
and a scene from real life that came under my eyes at the same moment,
in sowing time,--those were what impelled me to write this modest tale,
the scene of which is laid amid humble localities that I used to visit
every day. If any one asks me my purpose in writing it, I shall reply
that I desired to do a very simple and very touching thing, and that I
have not succeeded as I hoped. I have seen, I have felt the beautiful in
the simple, but to see and to depict are two different things! The most
that the artist can hope to do is to induce those who have eyes to look
with him. Therefore, my friends, look at simple things, look at the sky
and the fields and the trees and the peasants, especially at what is
good and true in them: you will see them to a slight extent in my book,
you will see them much better in nature.

GEORGE SAND.

NOHANT, _April 12, 1851_.




THE DEVIL'S POOL

I

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER

    A la sueur de ton visaige
     Tu gagnerois ta pauvre vie,
    Après long travail et usaige,
     Voicy la _mort_ qui te convie.[1]


The quatrain in old French written below one of Holbein's pictures is
profoundly sad in its simplicity. The engraving represents a ploughman
driving his plough through a field. A vast expanse of country stretches
away in the distance, with some poor cabins here and there; the sun is
setting behind the hill. It is the close of a hard day's work. The
peasant is a short, thick-set man, old, and clothed in rags. The four
horses that he urges forward are thin and gaunt; the ploughshare is
buried in rough, unyielding soil. A single figure is joyous and alert in
that scene of _sweat and toil_. It is a fantastic personage, a skeleton
armed with a whip, who runs in the furrow beside the terrified horses
and belabors them, thus serving the old husbandman as ploughboy. This
spectre, which Holbein has introduced allegorically in the succession of
philosophical and religious subjects, at once lugubrious and burlesque,
entitled the _Dance of Death_, is Death itself.

In that collection, or rather in that great book, in which Death,
playing his part on every page, is the connecting link and the dominant
thought, Holbein has marshalled sovereigns, pontiffs, lovers, gamblers,
drunkards, nuns, courtesans, brigands, paupers, soldiers, monks, Jews,
travellers, the whole world of his day and of ours; and everywhere the
spectre of Death mocks and threatens and triumphs. From a single picture
only, is it absent. It is that one in which Lazarus, the poor man, lying
on a dunghill at the rich man's door, declares that he does not fear
Death, doubtless because he has nothing to lose and his life is
premature death.

Is that stoicist idea of the half-pagan Christianity of the Renaissance
very comforting, and do devout souls find consolation therein? The
ambitious man, the rascal, the tyrant, the rake, all those haughty
sinners who abuse life, and whom Death holds by the hair, are destined
to be punished, without doubt; but are the blind man, the beggar, the
madman, the poor peasant, recompensed for their long life of misery by
the single reflection that death is not an evil for them? No! An
implacable melancholy, a ghastly fatality, overshadows the artist's
work. It resembles a bitter imprecation upon the fate of mankind.

There truly do we find the grievous satire, the truthful picture of the
society Holbein had under his eyes. Crime and misfortune, those are what
impressed him; but what shall we depict, we artists of another age?
Shall we seek in the thought of death the reward of mankind in the
present day? Shall we invoke it as the punishment of injustice and the
guerdon of suffering?

No, we have no longer to deal with Death, but with Life. We no longer
believe either in the nothingness of the tomb or in salvation purchased
by obligatory renunciation; we want life to be good because we want it
to be fruitful. Lazarus must leave his dunghill, so that the poor may no
longer rejoice at the death of the rich. All must be happy, so that the
happiness of some may not be a crime and accursed of God. The husbandman
as he sows his grain must know that he is working at the work of life,
and not rejoice because Death is walking beside him. In a word, death
must no longer be the punishment of prosperity or the consolation of
adversity. God did not destine death as a punishment or a compensation
for life; for he blessed life, and the grave should not be a refuge to
which it is permitted to send those who cannot be made happy.

Certain artists of our time, casting a serious glance upon their
surroundings, strive to depict grief, the abjectness of poverty,
Lazarus's dunghill. That may be within the domain of art and philosophy;
but, by representing poverty as so ugly, so base, and at times so
vicious and criminal a thing, do they attain their end, and is the
effect as salutary as they could wish? We do not dare to say. We may be
told that by pointing out the abyss that yawns beneath the fragile crust
of opulence, they terrify the wicked rich man, as, in the time of the
_Danse Macabre_, they showed him its yawning ditch, and Death ready to
wind its unclean arms about him. To-day, they show him the thief picking
his lock, the assassin watching until he sleeps. We confess that we do
not clearly understand how they will reconcile him with the humanity he
despises, how they will move his pity for the sufferings of the poor man
whom he fears, by showing him that same poor man in the guise of the
escaped felon and the burglar. Ghastly Death, gnashing his teeth and
playing the violin in the productions of Holbein and his predecessors,
found it impossible in that guise to convert the perverse and to comfort
their victims. Is it not a fact that the literature of our day is in
this respect following to some extent in the footsteps of the artists of
the Middle Ages and the Renaissance?

Holbein's drunkards fill their glasses in a sort of frenzied desire to
put aside the thought of Death, who, unseen by them, acts as their
cup-bearer. The wicked rich men of to-day demand fortifications and
cannon to put aside the thought of a rising of the Jacquerie, whom art
shows them at work in the shadow, separately awaiting the moment to
swoop down upon society. The Church of the Middle Ages answered the
terrors of the powerful ones of the earth by selling indulgences. The
government of to-day allays the anxiety of the rich by making them pay
for many gendarmes and jailers, bayonets and prisons.

Albert Dürer, Michael Angelo, Holbein, Callot, Goya, produced powerful
satires upon the evils of their age and their country. They are immortal
works, historical pages of unquestionable value; we do not undertake,
therefore, to deny artists the right to probe the wounds of society and
lay them bare before our eyes; but is there nothing better to be done
to-day than to depict the terrifying and the threatening? In this
literature of mysteries of iniquity, which talent and imagination have
made fashionable, we prefer the mild, attractive figures to the villains
for dramatic effect. The former may undertake and effect conversions,
the others cause fear, and fear does not cure egoism, but increases it.

We believe that the mission of art is a mission of sentiment and love,
that the novel of to-day ought to replace the parable and the fable of
simpler times, and that the artist has a broader and more poetic task
than that of suggesting a few prudential and conciliatory measures to
lessen the alarm his pictures arouse. His object should be to make the
objects of his solicitude lovable, and I would not reproach him for
flattering them a little, in case of need. Art is not a study of
positive reality, it is a quest for ideal truth, and the _Vicar of
Wakefield_ was a more useful and healthy book for the mind than the
_Paysan Perverti_ or the _Liaisons Dangereuses._

Reader, pardon these reflections, and deign to accept them by way of
preface. There will be no other to the little tale I propose to tell
you, and it will be so short and so simple that I felt that I must
apologize beforehand by telling you what I think of terrifying tales.

I allowed myself to be drawn into this digression apropos of a
ploughman. It is the story of a ploughman that I set out to tell you,
and will tell you forthwith.




II

THE PLOUGHING


I had been gazing for a long time and with profound sadness at Holbein's
ploughman, and I was walking in the fields, musing upon country-life and
the destiny of the husbandman. Doubtless it is a depressing thing to
consume one's strength and one's life driving the plough through the
bosom of the jealous earth, which yields the treasures of its fecundity
only under duress, when a bit of the blackest and coarsest bread at the
end of the day is the only reward and the only profit of such laborious
toil. The wealth that covers the ground, the crops, the fruit, the proud
cattle fattening on the long grass, are the property of a few, and the
instruments of fatigue and slavery of the majority. As a general rule,
the man of leisure does not love, for themselves, the fields, or the
meadows, or the spectacle of nature, or the superb beasts that are to be
converted into gold pieces for his use. The man of leisure comes to the
country in search of a little air and health, then returns to the city
to spend the fruit of his vassal's toil.

The man of toil, for his part, is too crushed, too wretched, and too
frightened concerning the future, to enjoy the beauties of the landscape
and the charms of rustic life. To him also the golden fields, the lovely
meadows, the noble animals, represent bags of crowns, of which he will
have only a paltry share, insufficient for his needs, and yet those
cursed bags must be filled every year to satisfy the master and pay for
the privilege of living sparingly and wretchedly on his domain.

And still nature is always young and beautiful and generous. She sheds
poetry and beauty upon all living things, upon all the plants that are
left to develop in their own way. Nature possesses the secret of
happiness, and no one has ever succeeded in wresting it from her. He
would be the most fortunate of men who, possessing the science of his
craft and working with his hands, deriving happiness and liberty from
the exercise of his intelligent strength, should have time to live in
the heart and the brain, to understand his work, and to love the work of
God. The artist has enjoyment of that sort in contemplating and
reproducing the beauties of Nature; but, when he sees the suffering of
the men who people this paradise called the earth, the just,
kind-hearted artist is grieved in the midst of his enjoyment. Where the
mind, heart, and arms work in concert under the eye of Providence, true
happiness would be found, and a holy harmony would exist between the
munificence of God and the delights of the human soul. Then, instead of
piteous, ghastly Death walking in his furrow, whip in hand, the painter
of allegories could place beside the ploughman a radiant angel, sowing
the blessed grain in the smoking furrows with generous hand.

And the dream of a peaceful, free, poetical, laborious, simple existence
for the husbandman is not so difficult of conception that it need be
relegated to a place among chimeras. The gentle, melancholy words of
Virgil: "O how happy the life of the husbandman, if he but knew his
happiness!" is an expression of regret; but, like all regrets, it is
also a prediction. A day will come when the ploughman may be an artist,
if not to express,--which will then matter but little, perhaps,--at all
events, to feel, the beautiful. Do you believe that this mysterious
intuition of poesy does not already exist within him in the state of
instinct and vague revery? In those who have a little hoard for their
protection to-day, and in whom excess of misery does not stifle all
moral and intellectual development, pure happiness, felt and
appreciated, is at the elementary stage; and, furthermore, if poets'
voices have already arisen from the bosom of sorrow and fatigue, why
should it be said that the work of the hands excludes the exercise of
the functions of the mind? That exclusion is probably the general result
of excessive toil and profound misery; but let it not be said that when
man shall work only moderately and profitably, then there will be none
but bad workmen and bad poets. He who derives noble enjoyment from the
inward sentiment of poesy is a true poet, though he has never written a
line in his life.

My thoughts had taken this course, and I did not notice that this
confidence in man's capacity for education was strengthened in my mind
by external influences. I was walking along the edge of a field which
the peasants were preparing for the approaching sowing. The field was an
extensive one, like that in Holbein's picture. The landscape, too, was
of great extent and framed in broad lines of verdure, slightly reddened
by the approach of autumn, the lusty brown earth, where recent rains had
left in some of the furrows lines of water which sparkled in the sun
like slender silver threads. It was a blight, warm day, and the ground,
freshly opened by the sharp ploughshares, exhaled a slight vapor. At
the upper end of the field, an old man, whose broad back and stern face
recalled the man in Holbein's picture, but whose clothing did not
indicate poverty, gravely drove his old-fashioned _areau_, drawn by two
placid oxen, with pale yellow hides, veritable patriarchs of the fields,
tall, rather thin, with long, blunt horns, hard-working old beasts whom
long companionship has made _brothers_, as they are called in our
country districts, and who, when they are separated, refuse to work with
new mates and die of grief. People who know nothing of the country call
this alleged friendship of the ox for his yoke-fellow fabulous. Let them
go to the stable and look at a poor, thin, emaciated animal, lashing his
sunken sides with his restless tail, sniffing with terror and contempt
at the fodder that is put before him, his eyes always turned toward the
door, pawing the empty place beside him, smelling the yoke and chains
his companion wore, and calling him incessantly with a pitiful bellow.
The driver will say: "There's a yoke of oxen lost; his brother's dead,
and he won't work. We ought to fatten him for killing; but he won't eat,
and he'll soon starve to death."

The old ploughman was working slowly, in silence, without useless
expenditure of strength. His docile team seemed in no greater hurry
than he; but as he kept constantly at work, never turning aside, and
exerting always just the requisite amount of sustained power, his furrow
was as quickly cut as his son's, who was driving four less powerful oxen
on some harder and more stony land a short distance away.

But the spectacle that next attracted my attention was a fine one
indeed, a noble subject for a painter. At the other end of the arable
tract, a young man of attractive appearance was driving a superb team:
four yoke of young beasts, black-coated with tawny spots that gleamed
like fire, with the short, curly heads that suggest the wild bull, the
great, wild eyes, the abrupt movements, the nervous, jerky way of doing
their work, which shows that the yoke and goad still irritate them and
that they shiver with wrath as they yield to the domination newly
imposed upon them. They were what are called oxen _freshly yoked_. The
man who was guiding them had to clear a field until recently used for
pasturage, and filled with venerable stumps--an athlete's task which his
energy, his youth, and his eight almost untamed beasts were hardly
sufficient to accomplish.

A child of six or seven years, as beautiful as an angel, with a lamb's
fleece covering his shoulders, over his blouse, so that he resembled
the little Saint John the Baptist of the painters of the Renaissance,
was trudging along in the furrow beside the plough and pricking the
sides of the oxen with a long, light stick, the end of which was armed
with a dull goad. The proud beasts quivered under the child's small
hand, and made the yokes and the straps about their foreheads groan,
jerking the plough violently forward. When the ploughshare struck a
root, the driver shouted in a resonant voice, calling each beast by his
name, but rather to soothe than to excite them; for the oxen, annoyed by
the sudden resistance, started forward, digging their broad forked feet
into the ground, and would have turned aside and dragged the plough
across the field, had not the young man held the four leaders in check
with voice and goad, while the child handled the other four. He, too,
shouted, poor little fellow, in a voice which he tried to render
terrible, but which remained as sweet as his angelic face. The whole
picture was beautiful in strength and in grace: the landscape, the man,
the child, the oxen under the yoke; and, despite the mighty struggle in
which the earth was conquered, there was a feeling of peace and profound
tranquillity hovering over everything. When the obstacle was surmounted
and the team resumed its even, solemn progress, the ploughman, whose
pretended violence was only to give his muscles a little practice and
his vitality an outlet, suddenly resumed the serenity of simple souls
and cast a contented glance upon his child, who turned to smile at him.
Then the manly voice of the young _paterfamilias_ would strike up the
solemn, melancholy tune which the ancient tradition of the province
transmits, not to all ploughmen without distinction, but to those most
expert in the art of arousing and sustaining the spirit of
working-cattle. That song, whose origin was perhaps held sacred, and to
which mysterious influences seem to have been attributed formerly, is
reputed even to the present day to possess the virtue of keeping up the
courage of those animals, of soothing their discontent, and of whiling
away the tedium of their long task. It is not enough to have the art of
driving them so as to cut the furrow in an absolutely straight line, to
lighten their labor by raising the share or burying it deeper in the
ground: a man is not a perfect ploughman if he cannot sing to his
cattle, and that is a special science which requires special taste and
powers.

To speak accurately, this song is only a sort of recitative, broken off
and taken up again at pleasure. Its irregular form and its intonations,
false according to the rules of musical art, make it impossible to
reproduce. But it is a fine song none the less, and so entirely
appropriate to the nature of the work it accompanies, to the gait of the
ox, to the tranquillity of rural scenes, to the simple manners of the
men who sing it, that no genius unfamiliar with work in the fields could
have invented it, and no singer other than a _cunning ploughman_ of that
region would know how to render it. At the time of year when there is no
other work and no other sign of activity in the country than the
ploughing, that sweet and powerful chant rises like the voice of the
breeze, which it resembles somewhat in its peculiar pitch. The final
word of each phrase, sustained at incredible length, and with marvellous
power of breath, ascends a fourth of a tone, purposely making a discord.
That is barbarous, perhaps, but the charm of it is indescribable, and
when one is accustomed to hear it, one cannot conceive of any other song
at that time and in those localities that would not disturb the harmony.

It happened, therefore, that I had before my eyes a picture in striking
contrast with Holbein's, although it might be a similar scene. Instead
of a sad old man, a cheerful young man; instead of a team of thin, sorry
horses, two yoke of four sturdy, spirited cattle; instead of Death, a
lovely child; instead of an image of despair and a suggestion of
destruction, a spectacle of energetic action and a thought of happiness.

Then it was that the French quatrain:

    "A la sueur de ton visaige," etc.,

and the _O fortunatos_----_agricolas_ of Virgil, came to my mind
simultaneously, and when I saw that handsome pair, the man and the
child, performing a grand and solemn task under such poetic conditions,
and with so much grace combined with so much strength, I had a feeling
of profound compassion mingled with involuntary respect. Happy the
husbandman. Yes, so I should be in his place, if my arm should suddenly
become strong and my chest powerful, so that they could thus fertilize
nature and sing to her, without my eyes losing the power to see and my
brain to understand the harmony of colors and sounds, the delicacy of
tones, and the gracefulness of contours,--in a word, the mysterious
beauty of things, and, above all, without my heart ceasing to be in
relation with the divine sentiment that presided at the immortal and
sublime creation.

But, alas! that man has never understood the mystery of the beautiful,
that child will never understand it! God preserve me from the thought
that they are not superior to the animals they guide, and that they have
not at times a sort of ecstatic revelation that charms away their
weariness and puts their cares to sleep! I see upon their noble brows
the seal of the Lord God, for they are born kings of the earth much more
truly than they who possess it, because they have paid for it. And the
proof that they feel that it is so is found in the fact that you cannot
expatriate them with impunity, and that they love the ground watered by
the sweat of their brow, that the true peasant dies of homesickness in
the uniform of the soldier, far from the fields where he was born. But
that man lacks a part of the enjoyments I possess, immaterial enjoyments
to which he is abundantly entitled, he the workman in the vast temple
which the heavens are vast enough to embrace. He lacks knowledge of his
own sentiments. They who condemned him to servitude from his mother's
womb, being unable to take from him the power of reverie, have taken the
power of reflection.

Ah! well, such as he is, incomplete and doomed to never-ending
childhood, he is nobler even so than he in whom knowledge has stifled
sentiment. Do not place yourselves above him, you who consider
yourselves endowed with the lawful and inalienable right to command him,
for that terrible error proves that in you the mind has killed the heart
and that you are the most incomplete and the blindest of men!--I prefer
the simplicity of his mind to the false enlightenment of yours; and if I
had to tell his life, it would be more pleasant for me to bring out its
attractive and affecting aspects than it is creditable to you to depict
the abject condition to which the scornful rigor of your social precepts
may debase him.

I knew that young man and that beautiful child; I knew their story, for
they had a story, everybody has his story, and everybody might arouse
interest in the romance of his own life if he but understood it.
Although a peasant and a simple ploughman, Germain had taken account of
his duties and his affections. He had detailed them to me ingenuously
one day, and I had listened to him with interest. When I had watched him
at work for a considerable time, I asked myself why his story should not
be written, although it was as simple, as straightforward, and as devoid
of ornament as the furrow he made with his plough.

Next year that furrow will be filled up and covered by a new furrow.
Thus the majority of men make their mark and disappear in the field of
humanity. A little earth effaces it, and the furrows we have made
succeed one another like graves in the cemetery. Is not the furrow of
the ploughman as valuable as that of the idler, who has a name, however,
a name that will live, if, by reason of some peculiarity or some absurd
exploit, he makes a little noise in the world?

So let us, if we can, rescue from oblivion the furrow of Germain, the
_cunning ploughman_. He will know nothing about it, and will not be
disturbed; but I shall have had a little pleasure in making the attempt.




III

PÈRE MAURICE


"Germain," his father-in-law said to him one day, "you must make up your
mind to marry again. It's almost two years since you lost my daughter,
and your oldest boy is seven years old. You're getting on toward thirty,
my boy, and when a man passes that age, you know, in our province, he's
considered too old to begin housekeeping again. You have three fine
children, and thus far they haven't been a trouble to us. My wife and
daughter-in-law have looked after them as well as they could, and loved
them as they ought. There's Petit-Pierre, he's what you might call
educated; he can drive oxen very handily already; he knows enough to
keep the cattle in the meadow, and he's strong enough to drive the
horses to water. So he isn't the one to be a burden to us; but the other
two--we love them, God knows! poor innocent creatures!--cause us much
anxiety this year. My daughter-in-law is about lying-in, and she still
has a little one in her arms. When the one we expect has come, she won't
be able to look after your little Solange, and especially your little
Sylvain, who isn't four years old and hardly keeps still a minute day or
night. His blood is hot, like yours: he'll make a good workman, but he's
a terrible child, and my old woman can't run fast enough now to catch
him when he runs off toward the ditch or in among the feet of the
cattle. And then, when my daughter-in-law brings this other one into the
world, her last but one will be thrown on my wife's hands for a month,
at least. So your children worry us and overburden us. We don't like to
see children neglected; and when you think of the accidents that may
happen to them for lack of watching, your mind's never at rest. So you
must have another wife, and I another daughter-in-law. Think it over, my
boy. I've already warned you more than once; time flies, and the years
won't wait for you. You owe it to your children and to us, who want to
have everything go right in the house, to marry as soon as possible."

"Well, father," the son-in-law replied, "if you really want me to do it,
I must gratify you. But I don't propose to conceal from you that it will
cause me a great deal of annoyance, and that I'd about as lief drown
myself. You know what you've lost, and you don't know what you may
find. I had an excellent wife, a good-looking wife, sweet and brave,
good to her father and mother, good to her husband, good to her
children, a good worker, in the fields or in the house, clever about her
work, good at everything, in fact; and when you gave her to me, when I
took her, it wasn't one of the conditions that I should forget her if I
had the bad luck to lose her."

"What you say shows a good heart, Germain," rejoined Père Maurice; "I
know you loved my daughter, that you made her happy, and that if you
could have satisfied Death by going in her place, Catherine would be
alive at this moment and you in the cemetery. She well deserved to have
you love her like that, and if you don't get over her loss, no more do
we. But I'm not talking about forgetting her. The good God willed that
she should leave us, and we don't let a day pass without showing Him, by
our prayers, our thoughts, our words, our acts, that we respect her
memory and are grieved at her departure. But if she could speak to you
from the other world and tell you her will, she would bid you seek a
mother for her little orphans. The question, then, is to find a woman
worthy to take her place. It won't be very easy; but it isn't
impossible; and when we have found her for you, you will love her as you
loved my daughter, because you are an honest man and because you will be
grateful to her for doing us a service and loving your children."

"Very good, Père Maurice," said Germain, "I will do what you wish, as I
always have done."

"I must do you the justice to say, my son, that you have always listened
to the friendship and sound arguments of the head of your family. So let
us talk over the matter of your choice of a new wife. In the first
place, I don't advise you to take a young woman. That isn't what you
need. Youth is fickle; and as it's a burden to bring up three children,
especially when they're the children of another marriage, what you must
have is a kind-hearted soul, wise and gentle, and used to hard work. If
your wife isn't about as old as yourself, she won't have sense enough to
accept such a duty. She will think you too old and your children too
young. She will complain, and your children will suffer."

"That is just what disturbs me," said Germain. "Suppose she should hate
the poor little ones, and they should be maltreated and beaten?"

"God forbid!" said the old man. "But evil-minded women are rarer in
these parts than good ones, and a man must be a fool not to be able to
put his hand on the one that suits him."

"True, father: there are some good girls in our village. There's Louise
and Sylvaine and Claudie and Marguerite--any one you please, in fact."

"Softly, softly, my boy, all those girls are too young or too poor--or
too pretty; for we must think of that, too, my son. A pretty woman isn't
always as steady as a plainer one."

"Do you want me to take an ugly one, pray?" said Germain, a little
disturbed.

"No, not ugly, for you will have other children by her, and there's
nothing so sad as to have ugly, puny, unhealthy children. But a woman
still in her prime, in good health and neither ugly nor pretty, would do
your business nicely."

"It is easy to see," said Germain, smiling rather sadly, "that to get
such a one as you want we must have her made to order; especially as you
don't want her to be poor, and rich wives aren't easy to get, especially
for a widower."

"Suppose she was a widow herself, Germain? what do you say to a widow
without children, and a snug little property?"

"I don't know of any just now in our parish."

"Nor do I, but there are other places."

"You have some one in view, father; so tell me at once who it is."




IV

GERMAIN, THE CUNNING PLOUGHMAN


"Yes, I have some one in view," replied Père Maurice. "It's one Léonard,
widow of one Guérin, who lives at Fourche."

"I don't know the woman or the place," replied Germain, resigned, but
becoming more and more depressed.

"Her name is Catherine, like your deceased wife's."

"Catherine? Yes, I shall enjoy having to say that name: Catherine! And
yet, if I can't love her as well as I loved the other, it will cause me
more pain than pleasure, for it will remind me of her too often."

"I tell you that you will love her: she's a good creature, a woman with
a big heart; I haven't seen her for a long time, she wasn't a
bad-looking girl then; but she is no longer young, she is thirty-two.
She belongs to a good family, all fine people, and she has eight or ten
thousand francs in land which she would be glad to sell, and buy other
land where she goes to live; for she, too, is thinking of marrying
again, and I know that, if her disposition should suit you, she wouldn't
think you a bad match."

"So you have arranged it all?"

"Yes, subject to the judgment of you two; and that is what you must ask
each other after you are acquainted. The woman's father is a distant
relation of mine and has been a very close friend. You know him, don't
you--Père Léonard?"

"Yes, I have seen him talking with you at the fairs, and at the last one
you breakfasted together: is this what you were talking about at such
length?"

"To be sure; he watched you selling your cattle and thought you did the
business very well, that you were a fine-appearing fellow, that you
seemed active and shrewd; and when I told him all that you are and how
well you have behaved to us during the eight years we've lived and
worked together, without ever an angry or discontented word, he took it
into his head that you must marry his daughter; and the plan suits me,
too, I confess, considering the good reputation she has, the integrity
of her family, and what I know about their circumstances."

"I see, Père Maurice, that you think a little about worldly goods."

"Of course I think about them. Don't you?"

"I will think about them, if you choose, to please you; but you know
that, for my part, I never trouble myself about what is or is not coming
to me in our profits. I don't understand about making a division, and my
head isn't good for such things. I know about the land and cattle and
horses and seed and fodder and threshing. As for sheep and vines and
gardening, the niceties of farming, and small profits, all that, you
know, is your son's business, and I don't interfere much in it. As for
money, my memory is short, and I prefer to yield everything rather than
dispute about thine and mine. I should be afraid of making a mistake and
claiming what is not due me, and if matters were not simple and clear, I
should never find my way through them."

"So much the worse, my son, and that's why I would like you to have a
wife with brains to take my place when I am no longer here. You have
never been willing to look into our accounts, and that might make
trouble between you and my son, when you don't have me to keep the peace
between you and tell you what is coming to each of you."

"May you live many years, Père Maurice! But don't you worry about what
will happen when you are gone; I shall never dispute with your son. I
trust Jacques as I trust myself, and as I have no property of my own, as
everything that can possibly come to me, comes to me as your daughter's
husband and belongs to our children, I can be easy in my mind and so can
you; Jacques would never try to defraud his sister's children for his
own, as he loves them almost equally."

"You are right in that, Germain. Jacques is a good son, a good brother,
and a man who loves the truth. But Jacques may die before you, before
your children are grown up, and one must always have a care not to leave
minors without a head to give them good advice and arrange their
differences. Otherwise the lawyers interfere, set them at odds with each
other, and make them eat everything up in lawsuits. So we ought not to
think of bringing another person into our house, man or woman, without
saying to ourselves that that person may some day have to direct the
conduct and manage the business of thirty or more children,
grandchildren, sons-in-law, and daughters-in-law. No one knows how much
a family may grow, and when the hive is too full and the time has come
to swarm, every one thinks about carrying off his honey. When I took
you for my son-in-law, although my daughter was rich and you poor, I
never reproached her for choosing you. I saw you were a good worker, and
I knew well that the best sort of riches for country people like us is a
good pair of arms and a heart like yours. When a man brings those things
into a family, he brings enough. But it's different with a woman: her
work in the house is to keep, not to get. Besides, now that you are a
father and are looking for a wife, you must remember that your new
children, having no sort of claim on the inheritance of your first
wife's children, would be left in want if you should die, unless your
wife had some property of her own. And then, it would cost something to
feed the children you are going to add to our little colony. If that
should fall on us alone, we would take care of them, never fear, and
without complaining; but everybody's comfort would be diminished, and
the first children would have to take their share of the privations.
When families increase beyond measure, and their means do not increase
in proportion, then want comes, however bravely we may struggle against
it. This is all I have to say, Germain; think it over, and try to make
yourself agreeable to Widow Guérin; for her good management and her
crowns will bring us aid for the present and peace of mind for the
future."

"Very good, father. I will try to like her and make her like me."

"To do that you must go to see her."

"At her home? At Fourche? That's a long way, isn't it? and we don't have
much time to run about at this season."

"When a marriage for love is on the carpet, you must expect to waste
time; but when it's a marriage of convenience between two people who
have no whims and who know what they want, it's soon arranged. Tomorrow
will be Saturday; you can shorten your day's ploughing a bit and start
about two o'clock, after dinner; you will be at Fourche by night;
there's a good moon just now, the roads are excellent, and it isn't more
than three leagues. Fourche is near Magnier. Besides, you can take the
mare."

"I should rather go afoot in this cool weather."

"True, but the mare's a fine beast, and a suitor makes a better
appearance if he comes well mounted. You must wear your new clothes and
carry a nice present of game to Père Léonard. You will say that you come
with a message from me, you will talk with him, you will pass the
Sunday with his daughter, and you will return with a _yes_ or a _no_ on
Monday morning."

"Very good," replied Germain calmly, and yet he was not altogether calm.

Germain had always lived a virtuous life, as hard-working peasants do.
Married at twenty, he had loved but one woman in his life, and since he
had become a widower, although he was naturally impulsive and vivacious,
he had never laughed and dallied with any other. He had faithfully
cherished a genuine regret in his heart, and he did not yield to his
father-in-law without a feeling of dread and melancholy; but the
father-in-law had always managed his family judiciously, and Germain,
who had devoted himself unreservedly to the common work, and
consequently to him who personified it, the father of the
family,--Germain did not understand the possibility of rebelling against
sound arguments, against the common interest of all.

Nevertheless, he was sad. Few days passed that he did not weep for his
wife in secret, and, although solitude was beginning to weigh upon him,
he was more terrified at the thought of forming a new union, than
desirous to escape from his grief. He said to himself vaguely that love
might have consoled him if it had taken him by surprise, for love does
not console otherwise. One cannot find it by seeking it; it comes to us
when we do not expect it. This project of marriage, conceived in cold
blood, which Père Maurice laid before him, the unknown fiancée, and,
perhaps, even all the good things that were said of her common-sense and
her virtue, gave him food for thought. And he went his way, musing as a
man muses who has not enough ideas to fight among themselves; that is to
say, not formulating in his mind convincing reasons for selfish
resistance, but conscious of a dull pain, and not struggling against an
evil which it was necessary to accept.

Meanwhile, Père Maurice had returned to the farm-house, while Germain
employed the last hour of daylight, between sunset and darkness, in
mending the breaches made by the sheep in the hedge surrounding a
vineyard near the farm buildings. He raised the stalks of the bushes,
and supported them with clods of earth, while the thrushes chattered in
the neighboring thicket, and seemed to call to him to make haste, they
were so curious to come to examine his work as soon as he had gone.




V

LA GUILLETTE


Père Maurice found in the house an elderly neighbor, who had come to
have a chat with his wife, and borrow some embers to light her fire.
Mère Guillette lived in a wretched hovel within two gunshots of the
farm. But she was a decent woman and a woman of strong will. Her poor
house was neat and clean, and her carefully patched clothes denoted
proper self-respect with all her poverty.

"You came to get some fire for the night, eh, Mère Guillette?" said the
old man. "Is there anything else you would like?"

"No, Père Maurice," she replied; "nothing just now. I'm no beggar, you
know, and I don't abuse my friends' kindness."

"That's the truth; and so your friends are always ready to do you a
service."

"I was just talking with your wife, and I was asking her if Germain had
at last made up his mind to marry again."

"You're no gossip," replied Père Maurice, "and one can speak before you
without fear of people talking; so I will tell my wife and you that
Germain has really made up his mind; he starts to-morrow for Fourche."

"Bless me!" exclaimed Mère Maurice; "the poor fellow! God grant that he
may find a wife as good and honest as himself!"

"Ah! he is going to Fourche?" observed La Guillette. "Just see how
things turn out! that helps me very much, and as you asked me just now,
Père Maurice, if there was anything I wanted, I'll tell you what you can
do to oblige me."

"Tell us, tell us, we shall be glad to oblige."

"I would like to have Germain take the trouble to take my daughter with
him."

"Where? to Fourche?"

"Not to Fourche, but to Ormeaux, where she is going to stay the rest of
the year."

"What!" said Mère Maurice, "are you going to part from your daughter?"

"She has got to go out to service and earn something. It comes hard
enough to me and to her, too, poor soul! We couldn't make up our minds
to part at midsummer; but now Martinmas is coming, and she has found a
good place as shepherdess on the farms at Ormeaux. The farmer passed
through here the other day on his way back from the fair. He saw my
little Marie watching her three sheep on the common land.--'You don't
seem very busy, my little maid,' he said; 'and three sheep are hardly
enough for a shepherd. Would you like to keep a hundred? I'll take you
with me. The shepherdess at our place has been taken sick and she's
going back to her people, and if you'll come to us within a week, you
shall have fifty francs for the rest of the year, up to midsummer.'--The
child refused, but she couldn't help thinking about it and telling me
when she came home at night and found me sad and perplexed about getting
through the winter, which is sure to be hard and long, for we saw the
cranes and wild geese fly south this year a full month earlier than
usual. We both cried; but at last we took courage. We said to each other
that we couldn't stay together, because there's hardly enough to keep
one person alive on our little handful of land; and then Marie's getting
old--here she is nearly sixteen--and she must do as others do, earn her
bread and help her poor mother."

"Mère Guillette," said the old ploughman, "if fifty francs was all that
was needed to put an end to your troubles and make it unnecessary for
you to send your daughter away, why, I would help you to find them,
although fifty francs begins to mean something to people like us. But we
must consult good sense as well as friendship in everything. If you were
saved from want for this winter, you wouldn't be safe from future want,
and the longer your daughter postpones taking the step, the harder it
will be for you and for her to part. Little Marie is getting to be tall
and strong, and she has nothing to do at home. She might fall into lazy
habits--"

"Oh! as far as that goes, I'm not afraid," said Mère Guillette. "Marie's
as brave as a rich girl at the head of a big establishment could be. She
doesn't sit still a minute with her arms folded, and when we haven't any
work, she cleans and rubs our poor furniture and makes every piece shine
like a looking-glass. She's a child that's worth her weight in gold, and
I'd have liked it much better to have her come to you as a shepherdess
instead of going so far away among people I don't know. You'd have
taken her at midsummer if we could have made up our minds; but now
you've hired all your help, and we can't think of it again until
midsummer next year."

"Oh! I agree with all my heart, Guillette! I shall be very glad to do
it. But, meanwhile, she will do well to learn a trade and get used to
working for others."

"Yes, of course; the die is cast. The farmer at Ormeaux sent for her
this morning; we said yes, and she must go. But the poor child doesn't
know the way, and I shouldn't like to send her so far all alone. As your
son-in-law is going to Fourche to-morrow, he can just as well take her.
It seems that it's very near the farm she's going to, according to what
they tell me; for I have never been there myself."

"They're right side by side, and my son-in-law will take her. That's as
it should be; indeed, he can take her behind him on the mare, and that
will save her shoes. Here he is, coming in to supper. I say, Germain,
Mère Guillette's little Marie is going to Ormeaux as shepherdess. You'll
take her on your horse, won't you?"

"Very well," said Germain, who was preoccupied, but always ready to do
his neighbor a service.

In our world, it would never occur to a mother to entrust a daughter of
sixteen to a man of twenty-eight! for Germain was really only
twenty-eight, and although, according to the ideas of his province, he
was considered an old man so far as marriage was concerned, he was still
the handsomest man in the neighborhood. Work had not furrowed and
wrinkled his face, as is the case with most peasants who have ten years
of ploughing behind them. He was strong enough to plough ten more years
without looking old, and the prejudice of age must have been very strong
in a young girl's mind to prevent her remarking that Germain had a fresh
complexion, a bright eye, blue as the heavens in May, ruddy lips, superb
teeth, and a body as graceful and supple as that of a colt that has
never left the pasture.

But chastity is a sacred tradition in certain country districts, far
removed from the corrupt animation of large cities, and Maurice's family
was noted among all the families of Belair for uprightness, and fidelity
to the truth. Germain was going in search of a wife; Marie was too young
and too pure for him to think of her in that light, and, unless he was a
heartless, bad man, it was impossible that he should have a guilty
thought in connection with her. Père Maurice was in no way disturbed,
therefore, to see him take the pretty girl _en croupe_; La Guillette
would have considered that she was insulting him if she had requested
him to respect her as his sister. Marie mounted the mare, weeping
bitterly, after she had kissed her mother and her young friends twenty
times over. Germain, who was also in a melancholy mood, had the more
sympathy with her grief, and rode away with a grave face, while the
neighbors waved their hands in farewell to poor Marie, with no thought
of evil to come.




VI

PETIT-PIERRE


_Grise_ was young and strong and handsome. She carried her double load
easily, putting back her ears and champing her bit like the proud,
high-spirited mare she was. As they rode by the long pasture, she spied
her mother--who was called Old Grise, as she was called Young Grise--and
neighed an adieu. Old Grise approached the fence, making her hopples
ring, tried to leap over into the road to follow her daughter; then,
seeing that she started off at a fast trot, she neighed in her turn, and
stood looking after her, pensive and disturbed in mind, with her nose in
the air, and her mouth filled with grass which she forgot to eat.

"The poor creature still knows her progeny," said Germain to divert
little Marie's thoughts from her grief. "That makes me think that I
didn't kiss my Petit-Pierre before I started. The bad boy wasn't there.
Last night, he strove to make me promise to take him along, and he
cried a good hour in his bed. This morning again he tried everything to
persuade me. Oh! what a shrewd, wheedling little rascal he is! but when
he saw that it couldn't be, monsieur lost his temper: he went off into
the fields, and I haven't seen him all day."

"I saw him," said Marie, trying to force back her tears. "He was running
toward the woods with the Soulas children, and I thought it likely he
had been away for some time, for he was hungry, and was eating wild
plums and blackberries off the bushes. I gave him some bread from my
luncheon, and he said: 'Thanks, my dear little Marie; when you come to
our house, I'll give you some cake.' The little fellow is just too
winning, Germain!"

"Yes, he is a winning child, and I don't know what I wouldn't do for
him," the ploughman replied. "If his grandmother hadn't had more sense
than I, I couldn't have kept from taking him with me when I saw him
crying so hard that his poor little heart was all swollen."

"Well! why didn't you bring him, Germain? he wouldn't have been in the
way; he's so good when you do what he wants you to."

"It seems that he would have been in the way where I am going. At
least, that was Père Maurice's opinion.--For my part, I should have
said, on the contrary, that we ought to see how he would be received,
and that nobody could help taking kindly to such a dear child.--But they
say at the house that I mustn't begin by exhibiting the burdens of the
household.--I don't know why I talk to you about this, little Marie: you
don't understand it."

"Yes, I do, Germain; I know you are going to get a wife; my mother told
me, and bade me not mention it to any one, either at home or where I am
going, and you needn't be afraid: I won't say a word."

"You will do well, for it isn't settled; perhaps I shan't suit the lady
in question."

"We must hope you will, Germain. Pray, why shouldn't you suit her?"

"Who knows? I have three children, and that's a heavy load for a woman
who isn't their mother!"

"That's true; but your children aren't like other children."

"Do you think so?"

"They are as beautiful as little angels, and so well brought up that you
can't find more lovable children anywhere."

"There's Sylvain, he's not over good."

"He's very small! he can't be anything but terrible; but he's so
bright!"

"True, he is bright: and such courage! he isn't a bit afraid of cows or
bulls, and if I would permit him, he'd be climbing up on the horses with
his older brother."

"If I had been in your place, I'd have brought the older one. Your
having such a beautiful child would surely make her love you on the
spot!"

"Yes, if the woman is fond of children; but suppose she doesn't like
them?"

"Are there women who don't like children?"

"Not many, I think; but there are some, and that is what worries me."

"Then you don't know this woman at all?"

"No more than you do, and I am afraid I shall not know her any better
after I have seen her. I am not suspicious. When any one says pleasant
words to me, I believe them; but I have had reason to repent more than
once, for words are not deeds."

"They say she's a fine woman."

"Who says so? Père Maurice?"

"Yes, your father-in-law."

"That's all right; but he doesn't know her, either."

"Well, you will soon see her; you will be very careful, and it's to be
hoped you won't make any mistake, Germain."

"Look you, little Marie, I should be very glad if you would go into the
house for a little while before going on to Ormeaux: you're a shrewd
girl, you have always shown that you have a keen mind, and you notice
everything. If you see anything that makes you think, you can quietly
tell me about it."

"Oh! no, Germain, I wouldn't do that! I should be too much afraid of
being mistaken; and, besides, if a word spoken thoughtlessly should
disgust you with this marriage, your people would blame me for it, and I
have enough troubles without bringing fresh ones on my poor dear
mother's head."

As they were talking thus, Grise pricked up her ears and shied, then
retraced her steps and approached the hedge, where there was something
which had frightened her at first, but which she now began to recognize.
Germain looked at the hedge and saw something that he took for a lamb in
the ditch, under the branches of an oak still thick and green.

"It's a stray lamb," he said, "or a dead one, for it doesn't move.
Perhaps some one is looking for it; we must see."

"It isn't a lamb," cried little Marie; "it's a child asleep; it's your
Petit-Pierre."

"Upon my word!" exclaimed Germain, dismounting; "just see the little imp
lying there asleep, so far from home, and in a ditch, where a snake
might find him!"

He raised the child, who opened his eyes and smiled at him, saying, as
he threw his arms around his neck:

"Little father, you're going to take me with you!"

"Oh, yes! still the same song! what were you doing there, naughty
Pierre?"

"I was waiting for my little father to pass; I was looking out on the
road, and I looked so hard I went to sleep."

"And if I had passed without seeing you, you would have stayed out all
night and the wolf would have eaten you!"

"Oh! I knew you'd see me!" rejoined Petit-Pierre confidently.

"Well, kiss me now, Pierre, bid me good-by, and run back to the house if
you don't want them to have supper without you."

"Why, ain't you going to take me with you?" cried the child, beginning
to rub his eyes to show that he proposed to weep.

"You know grandpa and grandma don't approve of it," said Germain, taking
refuge behind the authority of the old people, like one who places but
slight reliance on his own.

But the child heard nothing. He began to cry in good earnest, saying
that as long as his father took little Marie, he could take him too. He
was told that they would have to go through great forests, that there
were many wicked animals there that ate little children, that Grise
would not carry three, that she said so when they started, and that in
the country they were going to there was no bed or supper for little
monkeys. All these excellent reasons did not convince Petit-Pierre; he
threw himself on the grass and rolled about, crying that his father did
not love him, and that, if he refused to take him with him, he would not
go back to the house day or night.

Germain's fatherly heart was as soft and weak as a woman's. His wife's
death, the care he had been compelled to bestow upon his little ones,
together with the thought that the poor motherless children needed to be
dearly loved, had combined to make it so, and such a hard struggle took
place within him, especially as he was ashamed of his weakness, and
tried to conceal his distress from little Marie, that the perspiration
stood out on his forehead and his eyes were bordered with red as if
they, too, were all ready to shed tears. Finally, he tried to be angry;
but as he turned to little Marie, as if to call her to witness his
firmness of will, he saw that the dear girl's face was bathed in tears,
and, all his courage deserting him, it was impossible for him to keep
back his own, although he continued to scold and threaten.

"Really, your heart is too hard," said little Marie at last, "and for my
part, I could never hold out like that against a child who is so
unhappy. Come, Germain, take him along. Your mare is used to carrying
two grown people and a child, for your brother-in-law and his wife, who
is much heavier than I am, go to market every Saturday, with their boy,
on the honest creature's back. You can put him up in front of you;
indeed, I'd rather go all alone on foot than make the little fellow
suffer so."

"Don't be disturbed about that," said Germain, who was dying with
anxiety to be persuaded. "Grise is strong, and would carry two more if
there was room on her backbone. But what shall we do with the child on
the way? he will be cold and hungry--and who will look after him
to-night and to-morrow, put him to bed, wash him and dress him? I don't
dare put that trouble on a woman whom I don't know, and who will think,
I have no doubt, that I stand very little on ceremony with her for a
beginning."

"According to the good-will or annoyance she shows, you will be able to
judge her at once, Germain, believe me; and at all events, if she
doesn't take to your Pierre, I will take charge of him. I will go to her
house to dress him, and I'll take him into the fields to-morrow. I'll
amuse him all day, and see that he has all he needs."

"And he'll tire you out, my poor girl! He'll be a burden to you! a whole
day--that's a long while!"

"On the contrary, I shall enjoy it; he will be company for me, and make
me less unhappy the first day I shall have to pass in a new country. I
shall fancy I am still at home."

The child, seeing that little Marie was taking his part, had clung to
her skirt and held it so tight that she would have had to hurt him to
take it away. When he saw that his father was yielding, he took Marie's
hand in both his little sunburned ones and kissed it, leaping for joy,
and pulling her toward the mare with the burning impatience that
children show in all their desires.

"Well, well," said the girl, taking him in her arms, "we must try to
soothe this poor heart that is jumping like a little bird's, and if you
feel cold when night comes, my Pierre, just tell me, and I'll wrap you
in my cloak. Kiss your little father, and ask him to forgive you for
being such a bad boy. Tell him that it shall never happen again! never,
do you hear?"

"Yes, yes, on condition that I always do what he wants me to, eh?" said
Germain, wiping the little fellow's eyes with his handkerchief. "Ah!
Marie, you will spoil the rascal for me!--And really, little Marie,
you're too good. I don't know why you didn't come to us as shepherdess
last midsummer. You could have taken care of my children, and I would
rather have paid you a good price for waiting on them than go in search
of a wife who will be very likely to think that she's doing me a great
favor by not detesting them."

[Illustration: Chapter VI

_He raised the child, who opened his eyes and smiled at him, saying, as
he threw his arms around his neck.

"Little father, you are going to take me with you_!"]

"You mustn't look on the dark side of things like that," replied little
Marie, holding the rein while Germain placed his son on the front of
the heavy goat-skin-covered saddle; "if your wife doesn't like children,
you can hire me next year, and I'll amuse them so well that they won't
notice anything, never you fear."




VII

ON THE MOOR


"By the way," said Germain, when they had ridden on a short distance,
"what will they think at home when this little man doesn't appear? The
old people will be anxious, and they will scour the country for him."

"You can tell the man working on the road yonder that you have taken him
with you, and send him back to tell your people."

"True, Marie, you think of everything! It didn't even occur to me that
Jeannie would be in this neighborhood."

"He lives close to the farm, too: he won't fail to do your errand."


When they had taken that precaution, Germain started the mare off at a
trot, and Petit Pierre was so overjoyed that he did not notice at first
that he had not dined; but as the rapid movement of the horse dug a pit
in his stomach, he began, after a league or more, to yawn and turn
pale, and at last confessed that he was dying of hunger.

"Now he's beginning," said Germain. "I knew that we shouldn't go far
before monsieur would cry from hunger or thirst."

"I'm thirsty, too!" said Petit-Pierre.

"Well, we will go to Mère Rebec's wine-shop at Corlay, at the sign of
the _Break of Day_. A fine sign, but a poor inn! Come, Marie, you will
drink a finger of wine too."

"No, no, I don't need anything," she said, "I'll hold the mare while you
go in with the little one."

"But now I think of it, my dear girl, you gave the bread you had for
your luncheon to my Pierre, and you haven't had anything to eat; you
refused to dine with us at the house, and did nothing but weep."

"Oh! I wasn't hungry, I was too sad! and I promise you that I haven't
the slightest desire to eat now."

"We must force you to, little one; otherwise you'll be sick. We have a
long way to go, and we mustn't arrive there half-starved, and ask for
bread before we say good-day. I propose to set you the example, although
I'm not very hungry; but I shall make out to eat, considering that I
didn't dine very well, either. I saw you and your mother weeping, and it
made my heart sick. Come, come, I will tie Grise at the door; get down,
I insist upon it."

All three entered Mere Rebec's establishment, and in less than a quarter
of an hour the stout, limping hostess succeeded in serving them an
omelet of respectable appearance with brown-bread and light wine.

Peasants do not eat quickly, and Petit-Pierre had such an enormous
appetite that nearly an hour passed before Germain could think of
renewing their journey. Little Marie ate to oblige at first; then her
appetite came, little by little; for at sixteen one cannot fast long,
and the country air is an imperious master. The kind words Germain said
to her to comfort her and give her courage also produced their effect;
she made an effort to persuade herself that seven months would soon be
passed, and to think how happy she would be to be at home once more, in
her own village, since Père Maurice and Germain were agreed in promising
to take her into their service. But as she was beginning to brighten up
and play with Petit-Pierre, Germain conceived the unfortunate idea of
telling her to look out through the wine-shop window at the lovely view
of the valley, which they could see throughout its whole length from
that elevation, laughing and verdant and fertile. Marie looked, and
asked if they could see the houses at Belair from there.

"To be sure," replied Germain, "and the farm, and your house too. Look,
that little gray speck, not far from the great poplar at Godard, just
below the church-spire."

"Ah! I see it," said the girl; and thereupon she began to weep again.

"I did wrong to remind you of that," said Germain, "I keep doing foolish
things to-day! Come, Marie, my girl, let's be off; the days are short,
and when the moon comes up, an hour from now, it won't be warm."

They resumed their journey, and rode across the great heath, and as
Germain did not urge the mare, in order not to fatigue the girl and the
child by a too rapid gait, the sun had set when they left the road to
enter the woods.

Germain knew the road as far as Magnier; but he thought that he could
shorten it by not taking the avenue of Chanteloube, but going by Presles
and La Sépulture, a route which he was not in the habit of taking when
he went to the fair. He went astray and lost a little more time before
entering the woods; even then he did not enter at the right place, and
failed to discover his mistake, so that he turned his back to Fourche
and headed much farther up, in the direction of Ardentes.

He was prevented then from taking his bearings by a mist which came with
the darkness, one of those autumn evening mists which the white
moonlight makes more vague and more deceptive. The great pools of water
which abound in the clearings exhaled such dense vapor that when Grise
passed through them, they only knew it by the splashing of her feet and
the difficulty she had in pulling them out of the mud.

When they finally found a straight, level path, and had ridden to the
end of it, Germain, upon endeavoring to ascertain where he was, realized
that he was lost; for Père Maurice, in describing the road, had told him
that, on leaving the woods, he would have to descend a very steep hill,
cross a very large meadow, and ford the river twice. He had advised him
to be cautious about riding into the river, because there had been heavy
rains at the beginning of the season, and the water might be a little
high. Seeing no steep hill, no meadow, no river, but the level moor,
white as a sheet of snow, Germain drew rein, looked about for a house,
waited for some one to pass, but saw nothing to give him any
information. Thereupon he retraced his steps, and rode back into the
woods. But the mist grew denser, the moon was altogether hidden, the
roads were very bad, the ruts deep. Twice Grise nearly fell; laden as
she was, she lost courage, and although she retained sufficient
discernment to avoid running against trees, she could not prevent her
riders from having to deal with huge branches which barred the road at
the level of their heads and put them in great danger. Germain lost his
hat in one of these encounters, and had great difficulty in finding it.
Petit-Pierre had fallen asleep, and, lying back like a log, so
embarrassed his father's arms that he could not hold the mare up or
guide her.

"I believe we're bewitched," said Germain, drawing rein once more: "for
these woods aren't big enough for a man to lose himself in unless he's
drunk, and here we have been riding round and round for two hours,
unable to get out of them. Grise has only one idea in her head, and that
is to go back to the house, and she was the one that made me go astray.
If we want to go home, we have only to give her her head. But when we
may be within two steps of the place where we are to spend the night,
we should be mad to give up finding it, and begin such a long ride over
again. But I don't know what to do. I can't see either the sky or the
ground, and I am afraid this child will take the fever if we stay in
this infernal fog, or be crushed by our weight if the horse should fall
forward."

"We mustn't persist in riding any farther," said little Marie. "Let's
get down, Germain; give me the child; I can carry him very well, and
keep him covered up with the cloak better than you can. You can lead the
mare, and perhaps we shall see better when we're nearer the ground."

That expedient succeeded only so far as to save them from a fall, for
the fog crawled along the damp earth and seemed to cling to it. It was
very hard walking, and they were so exhausted by it that they stopped
when they at last found a dry place under some great oaks. Little Marie
was drenched, but she did not complain or seem disturbed. Thinking only
of the child, she sat down in the sand and took him on her knees, while
Germain explored the neighborhood after throwing Grise's rein over the
branch of a tree.

But Grise, who was thoroughly disgusted with the journey, jumped back,
released the reins, broke the girths, and, kicking up her heels higher
than her head some half-dozen times, by way of salutation, started off
through the brush, showing very plainly that she needed no one's
assistance in finding her way.

"Well, well," said Germain, after he had tried in vain to catch her,
"here we are on foot, and it would do us no good if we should find the
right road, for we should have to cross the river on foot; and when we
see how full of water these roads are, we can be sure that the meadow is
under water. We don't know the other fords. So we must wait till the
mist rises; it can't last more than an hour or two. When we can see, we
will look for a house, the first one we can find on the edge of the
wood; but at present we can't stir from here; there's a ditch and a pond
and I don't know what not in front of us; and I couldn't undertake to
say what there is behind us, for I don't know which way we came."




VIII

UNDER THE GREAT OAKS


"Oh! well, Germain, we must be patient," said little Marie. "We are not
badly off on this little knoll. The rain doesn't come through the leaves
of these great oaks, for I can feel some old broken branches that are
dry enough to burn. You have flint and steel, Germain? You were smoking
your pipe just now."

"I had them. My steel was in the bag on the saddle with the game I was
carrying to my intended; but the cursed mare carried off everything,
even my cloak, which she will lose or tear on all the branches." "Oh!
no, Germain; the saddle and cloak and bag are all there on the ground,
by your feet. Grise broke the girths and threw everything off when she
left."

"Great God, that's so!" said the ploughman; "and if we can feel round
and find a little dead wood, we can succeed in drying and warming
ourselves."

"That's not hard to do," said little Marie; "the dead wood cracks under
your feet wherever you step; but give me the saddle first."

"What are you going to do with it?"

"Make a bed for the little one: no, not like that; upside-down, so he
won't roll out; and it's still warm from the mare's back. Prop it up on
each side with those stones you see there."

"I don't see them! Your eyes are like a cat's, aren't they?"

"There! now that's done, Germain! Give me your cloak to wrap up his
little feet, and I'll put mine over his body. Look! isn't he as
comfortable there as he would be in his bed? and feel how warm he is!"

"Yes, indeed! you know how to take care of children, Marie!"

"That doesn't take much magic. Now look for your steel in your bag, and
I'll fix the wood."

"That wood will never light, it's too damp."

"You doubt everything, Germain! Why, can't you remember taking care of
sheep and making big fires in the fields when it was raining hard?"

"Yes, that's a knack that children who tend sheep have; but I've been an
ox-driver ever since I knew how to walk."

"That's how you came to be stronger in your arms than clever with your
hands. There's your fire all built; now you'll see if it won't burn!
Give me the fire and a few dry ferns. Good! now blow; you're not
weak-lunged, are you?"

"Not that I know of," said Germain, blowing like a forge-bellows. In a
moment, the flame shot up, cast a red light at first, and finally rose
in bluish flashes under the branches of the oaks, struggling with the
mist, and gradually drying the atmosphere for ten feet around.

"Now, I'll sit down beside the little one and see that no sparks fall on
him," said the girl. "You must throw on wood and keep the fire bright,
Germain! we shall not catch cold or the fever here, I promise you."

"Faith, you're a smart girl," said Germain, "and you can make a fire
like a little witch. I feel like a new man, and my courage is coming
back to me; for, with my legs wet to the knees, and the prospect of
staying here till daybreak in that condition, I was in a very bad humor
just now."

"And when one is in a bad humor, one never thinks of anything," rejoined
little Marie.

"And are you never in a bad humor, pray?"

"Oh! no, never! What's the use?"

"Why, it's of no use, that's certain; but how can you help it, when you
have things to annoy you? God knows that you have plenty of them, poor
child; for you haven't always been happy!"

"True, my poor mother and I have suffered. We have been unhappy, but we
never lost courage."

"I wouldn't lose courage for any work that ever was," said Germain; "but
poverty would grieve me, for I have never lacked anything. My wife made
me rich, and I am rich still; I shall be as long as I work at the farm:
that will be always, I hope; but every one has his own troubles! I have
suffered in another way."

"Yes, you lost your wife, and it was a great pity!"

"Wasn't it?"

"Oh! I cried bitterly for her, Germain, I tell you! for she was so kind!
But let's not talk about her any more or I shall cry again; all my
sorrows seem to be coming back to me to-day."

"Indeed, she loved you dearly, little Marie; she thought a deal of you
and your mother. What! you are crying! Come, come, my girl, I don't want
to cry, you know--"

"But you are crying, Germain! You are crying, too! Why should a man be
ashamed to cry for his wife? Cry on, don't mind me! I share that grief
with you!"

"You have a kind heart, Marie, and it does me good to weep with you. But
put your feet near the fire; your skirts are all damp, too, poor little
girl! Let me take your place by the child, and do you warm yourself
better than that."

"I'm warm enough," said Marie; "if you want to sit down, take a corner
of the cloak; I am very comfortable."

"To tell the truth, we're not badly off here," said Germain, seating
himself close beside her. "The only thing that troubles me now is
hunger. It must be nine o'clock, and I had such hard work walking in
those wretched roads, that I feel all fagged out. Aren't you hungry,
too, Marie?"

"I? Not at all. I'm not used to four meals a day as you are, and I have
been to bed without supper so many times, that once more doesn't worry
me much."

"Well, a wife like you is a great convenience; she doesn't cost much,"
said Germain, with a smile.

"I am not a wife," said Marie artlessly, not perceiving the turn the
ploughman's ideas were taking. "Are you dreaming?"

"Yes, I believe I am dreaming," was Germain's reply; "perhaps it's
hunger that makes my mind wander."

"What a gourmand you must be!" she rejoined, brightening up a little in
her turn; "well, if you can't live five or six hours without eating,
haven't you some game in your bag, and fire to cook it with?"

"The devil! that's a good idea! but what about the gift to my future
father-in-law?"

"You have six partridges and a hare! I don't believe you need all that
to satisfy your hunger, do you?"

"But if we undertake to cook it here, without a spit or fire-dogs, we
shall burn it to a cinder!"

"Oh! no," said little Marie; "I'll agree to cook it for you in the ashes
so it won't smell of smoke. Didn't you ever catch larks in the fields,
and haven't you cooked them between two stones? Ah! true! I forget that
you never tended sheep! Come, pluck that partridge! Not so hard! you'll
pull off the skin!"

"You might pluck another one to show me how!"

"What! do you propose to eat two? What an ogre! Well, there they are all
plucked, and now I'll cook them."

"You would make a perfect _cantinière_, little Marie; but unluckily you
haven't any canteen, and I shall be reduced to drink water from this
pool."

"You'd like some wine, wouldn't you? Perhaps you need coffee, too? you
imagine you're at the fair under the arbor! Call the landlord: liquor
for the cunning ploughman of Belair!"

"Ah! bad girl, you're laughing at me, are you? You wouldn't drink some
wine, I suppose, if you had some?"

"I? I drank with you to-night at La Rebec's for the second time in my
life; but if you'll be very good, I will give you a bottle almost full,
and of good wine too!"

"What, Marie, are you really a magician?"

"Weren't you foolish enough to order two bottles of wine at La Rebec's?
You drank one with the boy, and I took barely three drops out of the one
you put before me. But you paid for both of them without looking to
see."

"Well?"

"Well, I put the one you didn't drink in my basket, thinking that you or
the little one might be thirsty on the way; and here it is."

"You are the most thoughtful girl I ever saw. Well, well! the poor
child was crying when we left the inn, but that didn't prevent her from
thinking more of others than herself! Little Marie, the man who marries
you will be no fool."

"I hope not, for I shouldn't like a fool. Come, eat your partridges,
they are cooked to a turn; and, having no bread, you must be satisfied
with chestnuts."

"And where the devil did you get chestnuts?"

"That's wonderful, certainly! why, all along the road, I picked them
from the branches as we passed, and filled my pockets with them."

"Are they cooked, too?"

"What good would my wits do me if I hadn't put some chestnuts in the
fire as soon as it was lighted? We always do that in the fields."

"Now, little Marie, we will have supper together! I want to drink your
health and wish you a good husband--as good as you would wish yourself.
Tell me what you think about it!"

"I should have hard work, Germain, for I never yet gave it a thought."

"What! not at all? never?" said Germain, falling to with a ploughman's
appetite, but cutting off the best pieces to offer his companion, who
obstinately refused them, and contented herself with a few chestnuts.
"Tell me, little Marie," he continued, seeing that she did not propose
to reply, "haven't you ever thought about marrying? you're old enough,
though!"

"Perhaps I am," she said; "but I am too poor. You need at least a
hundred crowns to begin housekeeping, and I shall have to work five or
six years to save that much."

"Poor girl! I wish Pere Maurice would let me have a hundred crowns to
give you."

"Thank you very much, Germain. What do you suppose people would say
about me?"

"What could they say? everybody knows that I'm an old man and can't
marry you. So they wouldn't imagine that I--that you--"

"Look, ploughman! here's your son waking up," said little Marie.




IX

THE EVENING PRAYER


Petit-Pierre had sat up, and was looking all about with a thoughtful
expression.

"Ah! the rascal never does anything else when he hears anybody eating!"
said Germain; "a cannon-shot wouldn't wake him, but move your jaws in
his neighborhood, and he opens his eyes at once."

"You must have been like that at his age," said little Marie, with a
mischievous smile. "Well, my little Pierre, are you looking for the top
of your cradle? It's made of green leaves to-night, my child; but your
father's having his supper, all the same. Do you want to sup with him? I
haven't eaten your share; I thought you would probably claim it!"

"Marie, I insist on your eating," cried the ploughman; "I shan't eat any
more. I am a glutton, a boor; you go without on our account, and it's
not right; I'm ashamed of myself. It takes away my appetite, I tell
you; I won't let my son have any supper unless you take some."

"Let us alone," replied little Marie, "you haven't the key to our
appetites. Mine is closed to-day, but your Pierre's is wide open, like a
little wolf's. Just see how he goes at it! Oh! he'll be a sturdy
ploughman, too!"

In truth, Petit-Pierre soon showed whose son he was, and, although he
was hardly awake and did not understand where he was or how he came
there, he began to devour. Then, when his hunger was appeased, being
intensely excited as children generally are when their regular habits
are interrupted, he exhibited more quick wit, more curiosity, and more
shrewdness than usual. He made them tell him where he was, and when he
learned that he was in the middle of a forest, he was a little afraid.

"Are there naughty beasts in this forest?" he asked his father.

"No, there are none at all," was the reply. "Don't be afraid."

"Then you lied when you told me that the wolves would carry me off if I
went through the big forest with you?"

"Do you hear this reasoner?" said Germain in some embarrassment.

"He is right," replied little Marie, "you told him that; he has a good
memory, and he remembers it. But you must understand, my little Pierre,
that your father never lies. We passed the big forest while you were
asleep, and now we're in the little forest, where there aren't any
naughty beasts."

"Is the little forest very far from the big one?"

"Pretty far; and then the wolves never leave the big forest. Even if one
should come here, your father would kill him."

"And would you kill him, too, little Marie?"

"We would all kill him, for you would help us, my Pierre, wouldn't you?
You're not afraid, I know. You would hit him hard!"

"Yes, yes," said the child, proudly, assuming a heroic attitude, "we
would kill 'em."

"There's no one like you for talking to children," said Germain to
little Marie, "and for making them hear reason. To be sure, it isn't
long since you were a child yourself, and you remember what your mother
used to say to you. I believe that the younger one is, the better one
understands the young. I am very much afraid that a woman of thirty,
who doesn't know what it is to be a mother, will find it hard to learn
to prattle and reason with young brats."

"Why so, Germain? I don't know why you have such a bad idea of this
woman; you'll get over it!"

"To the devil with the woman!" said Germain. "I would like to go home
and never come back here. What do I need of a woman I don't know!"

"Little father," said the child, "why do you keep talking about your
wife to-day, when she is dead?"

"Alas! you haven't forgotten your poor dear mother, have you?"

"No, for I saw them put her in a pretty box of white wood, and my
grandma took me to her to kiss her and bid her good-by!--She was all
white and cold, and every night my aunt tells me to pray to the good
Lord to let her get warm with Him in heaven. Do you think she's there
now?"

"I hope so, my child; but you must keep on praying: that shows your
mother that you love her."

"I am going to say my prayer," replied the child; "I did not think of
saying it this evening. But I can't say it all by myself; I always
forget something. Little Marie must help me."

"Yes, Pierre, I will help you," said the girl. "Come, kneel here by my
side."

The child knelt on the girl's skirt, clasped his little hands, and began
to repeat his prayer with interest and fervently at first, for he knew
the beginning very well; then more slowly and hesitatingly, and at last
repeating word for word what Marie dictated to him, when he reached that
point in his petition beyond which he had never been able to learn, as
he always fell asleep just there every night. On this occasion, the
labor of paying attention and the monotony of his own tones produced
their customary effect, so that he pronounced the last syllables only
with great effort, and after they had been repeated three times; his
head grew heavy, and fell against Marie's breast: his hands relaxed,
separated, and fell open upon his knees. By the light of the camp-fire,
Germain looked at his little angel nodding against the girl's heart,
while she, holding him in her arms and warming his fair hair with her
sweet breath, abandoned herself to devout reverie and prayed mentally
for Catherine's soul.

Germain was deeply moved, and tried to think of something to say to
little Marie to express the esteem and gratitude she inspired in him,
but he could find nothing that would give voice to his thoughts. He
approached her to kiss his son, whom she was still holding against her
breast, and it was hard for him to remove his lips from Petit-Pierre's
brow.

"You kiss him too hard," said Marie, gently pushing the ploughman's head
away, "you will wake him. Let me put him to bed again, for he has gone
back to his dreams of paradise."

The child let her put him down, but as he stretched himself out on the
goat-skin of the saddle, he asked if he were on Grise. Then, opening his
great blue eyes, and gazing at the branches for a moment, he seemed to
be in a waking dream, or to be impressed by an idea that had come into
his mind during the day and took shape at the approach of sleep. "Little
father," he said, "if you're going to give me another mother, I want it
to be little Marie."

And, without awaiting a reply, he closed his eyes and went to sleep.




X

DESPITE THE COLD


Little Marie seemed to pay no further heed to the child's strange words
than to look upon them as a proof of friendship; she wrapped him up
carefully, stirred the fire, and, as the mist lying upon the neighboring
pool gave no sign of lifting, she advised Germain to lie down near the
fire and have a nap.

"I see that you're almost asleep now," she said, "for you don't say a
word, and you are staring at the fire just as your little one did just
now. Come, go to sleep, and I will watch over you and the child."

"You're the one to go to sleep," replied the ploughman, "and I will
watch both of you, for I never was less inclined to sleep; I have fifty
ideas in my head."

"Fifty, that's a good many," said the maiden, with some suggestion of
mockery in her tone; "there are so many people who would like to have
one!"

"Well, if I am not capable of having fifty, at all events I have one
that hasn't left me for an hour."

"And I'll tell you what it is, as well as the ones you had before it."

"Very good! tell me, if you can guess, Marie; tell me yourself, I shall
like that."

"An hour ago," she retorted, "you had the idea of eating, and now you
have the idea of sleeping."

"Marie, I am only an ox-driver at best, but really, you seem to take me
for an ox. You're a bad girl, and I see that you don't want to talk with
me. Go to sleep, that will be better than criticising a man who isn't in
good spirits."

"If you want to talk, let us talk," said the girl, half-reclining beside
the child and resting her head against the saddle. "You're determined to
worry, Germain, and in that you don't show much courage for a man. What
should I not say, if I didn't fight as hard as I can against my own
grief?"

"What, indeed; and that is just what I have in my head, my poor child!
You're going to live far away from your people in a wretched place, all
moors and bogs, where you will catch the fever in autumn, where there's
no profit in raising sheep for wool, which always vexes a shepherdess
who is interested in her business; and then you will be among strangers
who may not be kind to you, who won't understand what you are worth.
Upon my word, it pains me more than I can tell you, and I have a mind to
take you back to your mother, instead of going to Fourche."

"You speak very kindly, but without sense, my poor Germain; one
shouldn't be cowardly for his friends, and instead of pointing out the
dark side of my lot, you ought to show me the bright side, as you did
when we dined at La Rebec's."

"What would you have? that's the way things looked to me then, and they
look different now. You would do better to find a husband."

"That can't be, Germain, as I told you; and as it can't be, I don't
think about it."

"But suppose you could find one, after all? Perhaps, if you would tell
me what sort of a man you'd like him to be, I could succeed in thinking
up some one."

"To think up some one is not to find him. I don't think about it at all,
for it's of no use."

"You have never thought of finding a rich husband?"

"No, of course not, as I am poor as Job."

"But if he should be well off, you wouldn't be sorry to be well lodged,
well fed, well dressed, and to belong to a family of good people who
would allow you to help your mother along?"

"Oh! as to that, yes! to help my mother is my only wish."

"And if you should meet such a man, even if he wasn't in his first
youth, you wouldn't object very much?"

"Oh! excuse me, Germain. That's just the thing I am particular about. I
shouldn't like an old man."

"An old man, of course not; but a man of my age, for instance?"

"Your age is old for me, Germain; I should prefer Bastien so far as age
goes, though Bastien isn't such a good-looking man as you."

"You would prefer Bastien the swineherd?" said Germain bitterly. "A
fellow with eyes like the beasts he tends!"

"I would overlook his eyes for the sake of his eighteen years."

Germain had a horrible feeling of jealousy.--"Well, well," he said, "I
see that your mind is set on Bastien. It's a queer idea, all the same!"

"Yes, it would be a queer idea," replied little Marie, laughing
heartily, "and he would be a queer husband. You could make him believe
whatever you chose. For instance, I picked up a tomato in monsieur le
curé's garden the other day; I told him it was a fine red apple, and he
bit into it like a glutton. If you had seen the wry face he made! _Mon
Dieu_, how ugly he was!"

"You don't love him then, as you laugh at him?"

"That wouldn't be any reason. But I don't love him: he's cruel to his
little sister, and he isn't clean."

"Very good! and you don't feel inclined toward anybody else?"

"What difference does it make to you, Germain?"

"No difference, it's just for something to talk about. I see, my girl,
that you have a sweetheart in your head already."

"No, Germain, you're mistaken, I haven't one yet; it may come later: but
as I shall not marry till I have saved up a little money, it will be my
lot to marry late and to marry an old man."

"Well, then, take an old man now."

"No indeed! when I am no longer young myself, it will be all the same to
me; now it would be different."

"I see, Marie, that you don't like me; that's very clear," said Germain
angrily, and without weighing his words.

Little Marie did not reply. Germain leaned over her: she was asleep; she
had fallen back, conquered, struck down, as it were, by drowsiness, like
children who fall asleep while they are prattling.

Germain was well pleased that she had not heard his last words; he
realized that they were unwise, and he turned his back upon her, trying
to change the current of his thoughts.

But it was of no avail, he could not sleep, nor could he think of
anything else than what he had just said. He walked around the fire
twenty times, walked away and returned; at last, feeling as excited as
if he had swallowed a mouthful of gunpowder, he leaned against the tree
that sheltered the two children and watched them sleeping.

[Illustration: Chapter IX

_The child knelt on the girl's skirt, clasped his little hands, and
began to repeat his prayer with interest and fervently at first, for he
knew the beginning very well_.]

"I don't know why I never noticed that little Marie is the prettiest
girl in the province!" he thought. "She hasn't a great deal of color,
but her little face is as fresh as a wild rose! What a pretty mouth and
what a cunning little nose!--She isn't tall for her age, but she's built
like a little quail and light as a lark!--I don't know why they think
so much at home of a tall, stout, red-faced woman. My wife was rather
thin and pale, and she suited me above all others.--This girl is
delicate, but she's perfectly well and as pretty to look at as a white
kid! And what a sweet, honest way she has! how well you can read her
kind heart in her eyes, even when they are closed in sleep!--As for wit,
she has more than my dear Catherine had, I must admit, and one would
never be bored with her.--She's light-hearted, she's virtuous, she's a
hard worker, she's affectionate, and she's amusing.--I don't see what
more one could ask.

"But what business have I to think of all that?" resumed Germain, trying
to look in another direction. "My father-in-law wouldn't listen to it,
and the whole family would treat me as a madman! Besides, she herself
wouldn't have me, poor child!--She thinks I am too old: she told me so.
She isn't interested; it doesn't worry her much to think of being in
want and misery, of wearing poor clothes and suffering with hunger two
or three months in the year, provided that she satisfies her heart some
day and can give herself to a husband who suits her--and she's right,
too! I would do the same in her place--and at this moment, if I could
follow my own will, instead of embarking on a marriage that I don't
like the idea of, I would choose a girl to my taste."

The more Germain strove to argue with himself and calm himself, the less
he succeeded. He walked twenty steps away, to lose himself in the mist;
and then he suddenly found himself on his knees beside the two sleeping
children. Once he even tried to kiss Petit-Pierre, who had one arm
around Marie's neck, and he went so far astray that Marie, feeling a
breath as hot as fire upon her lips, awoke and looked at him in terror,
understanding nothing of what was taking place within him.

"I didn't see you, my poor children!" said Germain, quickly drawing
back. "I came very near falling on you and hurting you."

Little Marie was innocent enough to believe him and went to sleep again.
Germain went to the other side of the fire, and vowed that he would not
stir until she was awake. He kept his word, but it was a hard task. He
thought that he should go mad.

At last, about midnight, the fog disappeared, and Germain could see the
stars shining through the trees. The moon also shook itself clear of the
vapors that shrouded it and began to sow diamonds on the damp moss. The
trunks of the oak-trees remained in majestic obscurity; but, a little
farther away, the white stems of the birches seemed like a row of
phantoms in their shrouds. The fire was reflected in the pool; and the
frogs, beginning to become accustomed to it, hazarded a few shrill,
timid notes; the knotty branches of the old trees, bristling with pale
lichens, crossed and recrossed, like great fleshless arms, over our
travellers' heads; it was a lovely spot, but so lonely and melancholy
that Germain, weary of suffering there, began to sing and to throw
stones into the water to charm away the ghastly _ennui_ of solitude. He
wanted also to wake little Marie; and when he saw her rise and look
about to see what the weather was like, he suggested that they should
resume their journey.

"In two hours," he said, "the approach of dawn will make the air so cold
that we couldn't stay here, notwithstanding our fire.--Now we can see
where we are going, and we shall be sure to find a house where they will
let us in, or at least a barn where we can pass the rest of the night
under cover."

Marie had no wish in the matter; and although she was still very sleepy,
she prepared to go with Germain.

He took his son in his arms without waking him, and insisted that Marie
should come and take a part of his cloak as she would not take her own
from around Petit-Pierre.

When he felt the girl so near him, Germain, who had succeeded in
diverting his thoughts and had brightened up a little for a moment,
began to lose his head again. Two or three times he walked abruptly away
from her and left her to walk by herself. Then, seeing that she had
difficulty in keeping up with him, he waited for her, drew her hastily
to his side, and held her so tight that she was amazed and angry too,
although she dared not say so.

As they had no idea in what direction they had started out, they did not
know in what direction they were going; so that they passed through the
whole forest once more, found themselves again on the edge of the
deserted moor, retraced their steps, and, after turning about and
walking a long while, they spied a light through the trees.

"Good! there's a house," said Germain, "and people already awake, as the
fire's lighted. Can it be very late?"

But it was not a house: it was their camp-fire which they had covered
when they left it, and which had rekindled in the breeze.

They had walked about for two hours, only to find themselves back at
their starting-point.




XI

IN THE OPEN AIR


"This time I give it up!" said Germain, stamping on the ground. "A spell
has been cast on us, that's sure, and we shall not get away from here
till daylight. This place must be bewitched."

"Well, well, let's not lose our tempers," said Marie, "but let us make
the best of it. We'll make a bigger fire, the child is so well wrapped
up that he runs no risk, and it won't kill us to pass a night
out-of-doors. Where did you hide the saddle, Germain? In the middle of
the holly-bushes, you great stupid! It's such a convenient place to go
and get it!"

"Here, take the child, while I pull his bed out of the brambles; I don't
want you to prick your fingers."

"It's all done, there's the bed, and a few pricks aren't sword-cuts,"
retorted the brave girl.

She proceeded to put little Pierre to bed once more; the boy was so
sound asleep by that time, that he knew nothing about their last
journey. Germain piled so much wood on the fire that it lighted up the
forest all around; but little Marie was at the end of her strength, and,
although she did not complain, her legs refused to hold her. She was
deathly pale, and her teeth chattered with cold and weakness. Germain
took her in his arms to warm her; and anxiety, compassion, an
irresistible outburst of tenderness taking possession of his heart,
imposed silence on his passions. His tongue was loosened, as if by a
miracle, and as all feeling of shame disappeared, he said to her:

"Marie, I like you, and I am very unfortunate in not making you like me.
If you would take me for your husband, neither father-in-law nor
relations nor neighbors nor advice could prevent me from giving myself
to you. I know you would make my children happy and teach them to
respect their mother's memory, and, as my conscience would be at rest, I
could satisfy my heart. I have always been fond of you, and now I am so
in love with you that if you should ask me to spend my life fulfilling
your thousand wishes, I would swear on the spot to do it. Pray, pray,
see how I love you and forget my age! Just think what a false idea it is
that people have that a man of thirty is old. Besides, I am only
twenty-eight! a girl is afraid of being criticised for taking a man ten
or twelve years older than she is, because it isn't the custom of the
province; but I have heard that in other places they don't think about
that; on the other hand, they prefer to give a young girl, for her
support, a sober-minded man and one whose courage has been put to the
test, rather than a young fellow who may go wrong, and turn out to be a
bad lot instead of the nice boy he is supposed to be. And then, too,
years don't always make age. That depends on a man's health and
strength. When a man is worn out by overwork and poverty, or by evil
living, he is old before he's twenty-five. While I--But you're not
listening to me, Marie."

"Yes, I am, Germain, I hear what you say," replied little Marie; "but I
am thinking of what my mother has always told me: that a woman of sixty
is much to be pitied when her husband is seventy or seventy-five and
can't work any longer to support her. He grows infirm, and she must take
care of him at an age when she herself is beginning to have great need
of care and rest. That is how people come to end their lives in the
gutter."

"Parents are right to say that, I agree, Marie," said Germain; "but,
after all, they would sacrifice the whole of youth, which is the best
part of life, to provide against what may happen at an age when one has
ceased to be good for anything, and when one is indifferent about ending
his life in one way or another. But I am in no danger of dying of hunger
in my old age. I am in a fair way to save up something, because, living
as I do with my wife's people, I work hard and spend nothing. Besides, I
will love you so well, you know, that that will prevent me from growing
old. They say that when a man's happy he retains his youth, and I feel
that I am younger than Bastien just from loving you; for he doesn't love
you, he's too stupid, too much of a child to understand how pretty and
good you are, and made to be courted. Come, Marie, don't hate me, I am
not a bad man; I made my Catherine happy; she said before God, on her
death-bed, that she had never been anything but contented with me, and
she advised me to marry again. It seems that her heart spoke to her
child to-night, just as he went to sleep. Didn't you hear what he said?
and how his little mouth trembled while his eyes were looking at
something in the air that we couldn't see! He saw his mother, you may be
sure, and she made him say that he wanted you to take her place."

"Germain," Marie replied, greatly surprised and very grave, "you talk
straightforwardly, and all you say is true. I am sure that I should do
well to love you, if it wouldn't displease your relations too much; but
what would you have me do? my heart says nothing to me for you. I like
you very much; but although your age doesn't make you ugly, it frightens
me. It seems to me as if you were something like an uncle or godfather
to me; that I owe you respect, and that there would be times when you
would treat me as a little girl rather than as your wife and your equal.
And then my girl friends would laugh at me, perhaps, and although it
would be foolish to pay any attention to that, I think I should be
ashamed and a little bit sad on my wedding-day."

"Those are childish reasons; you talk exactly like a child, Marie!"

"Well, yes, I am a child," she said, "and that is just why I am afraid
of a man who knows too much. You see, I'm too young for you, for you are
finding fault with me already for talking foolishly! I can't have more
sense than belongs to my years."

"Alas! _mon Dieu_! how I deserve to be pitied for being so awkward and
for my ill-success in saying what I think! Marie, you don't love me,
that's the fact; you think I am too simple and too dull. If you loved me
a little, you wouldn't see my defects so plainly. But you don't love me,
you see!"

"Well, it isn't my fault," she replied, a little wounded by his dropping
the familiar form of address he had hitherto used; "I do the best I can
while I listen to you, but the harder I try, the less able I am to make
myself believe that we ought to be husband and wife."

Germain did not reply. He hid his face in his hands and it was
impossible for little Marie to tell whether he was crying or sulking or
asleep. She was a little disturbed to see him so depressed, and to be
unable to divine what was going on in his mind; but she dared say no
more to him, and as she was too much astonished by what had taken place
to have any desire to go to sleep again, she waited impatiently for
daybreak, continuing to keep up the fire and watching the child, whom
Germain seemed to have forgotten. Germain, meanwhile, was not asleep; he
was not reflecting on his lot, nor was he devising any bold stroke, or
any plan of seduction. He was suffering keenly, he had a mountain of
_ennui_ upon his heart. He wished he were dead. Everything seemed to be
turning out badly for him, and if he could have wept, he would not have
done it by halves. But there was a little anger with himself mingled
with his suffering, and he was suffocating, unable and unwilling to
complain.

When day broke and the noise in the fields announced the fact to
Germain, he took his hands from his face and rose. He saw that little
Marie had not slept, either, but he could think of nothing to say to her
to show his solicitude. He was utterly discouraged. He concealed Grise's
saddle in the bushes once more, took his bag over his shoulder, and
said, taking his son's hand:

"Now, Marie, we'll try and finish our journey. Do you want me to take
you to Ormeaux?"

"We will go out of the woods together," she replied, "and when we know
where we are, we will go our separate ways."

Germain said nothing. He was wounded because the girl did not ask him to
escort her to Ormeaux, and he did not realize that he had made the offer
in a tone that seemed to challenge a refusal.

A wood-cutter, whom they met within two hundred paces, pointed out the
path they must take, and told them that after crossing the great meadow
they had only to go, in the one case straight ahead, in the other to
the left, to reach their respective destinations, which, by the way,
were so near together that the houses at Fourche could be distinctly
seen from the farm of Ormeaux, and _vice versa_.

When they had thanked the wood-cutter and passed on, he called them back
to ask if they had not lost a horse.

"I found a fine gray mare in my yard," he said, "where she may have gone
to escape the wolf. My dogs barked all night long, and at daybreak I saw
the beast under my shed; she's there still. Go and look at her, and if
you know her, take her."

Germain, having described Grise and being convinced that it was really
she, started back to get his saddle. Little Marie thereupon offered to
take the child to Ormeaux, where he could come and get him after he had
paid his respects at Fourche.

"He isn't very clean after the night we have passed," she said. "I will
brush his clothes, wash his pretty little face, and comb his hair, and
when he's all spick and span, you can present him to your new family."

"How do you know that I am going to Fourche?" rejoined Germain testily.
"Perhaps I shan't go there."

"Oh! yes, Germain, you ought to go, and you will," said the girl.

"You are in a great hurry to have me married to somebody else, so that
you can be sure I won't make myself a nuisance to you."

"Come, come, Germain, don't think any more about that; that's an idea
that came to you in the night, because our unpleasant adventure
disturbed your wits a little. But now you must be reasonable again; I
promise to forget what you said to me and never to mention it to any
one."

"Oh! mention it, if you choose. I am not in the habit of taking back
what I say. What I said to you was true and honest, and I shan't blush
for it before any one."

"Very good; but if your wife knew that you had thought of another woman
just at the moment you called on her, it might turn her against you. So
be careful what you say now; don't look at me like that, with such a
strange expression, before other people. Think of Père Maurice, who
relies on your obedience, and who would be very angry with me if I
turned you from doing as he wants you to. Good-by, Germain; I'll take
Petit-Pierre with me so as to force you to go to Fourche. I keep him as
a pledge."

"Do you want to go with her?" said the ploughman to his son, seeing
that he was clinging to little Marie's hands and following her
resolutely.

"Yes, father," replied the child, who had been listening and understood
in his own way what they had been saying unsuspectingly before him. "I
am going with my darling Marie: you can come and get me when you're done
getting married; but I want Marie to be my little mother, just the
same."

"You see that he wants it to be so," Germain said to the young girl.
"Listen, Petit-Pierre," he added, "I want her to be your mother and stay
with you always: she's the one that isn't willing. Try to make her do
what I want her to."

"Don't you be afraid, papa, I'll make her say yes: little Marie always
does what I want her to."

He walked away with the girl. Germain was left alone, more depressed and
irresolute than ever.




XII

THE VILLAGE LIONESS


However, when he had repaired the disorder of travel in his clothes and
his horse's accoutrements, when he was mounted upon Grise and had
ascertained the road to Fourche, he reflected that there was no drawing
back and that he must forget that night of excitement as a dangerous
dream.

He found Père Léonard in the doorway of his white house, sitting on a
pretty wooden bench painted spinach green. There were six stone steps
leading to the frontdoor, showing that the house had a cellar. The wall
between the garden and hemp-field was roughcast with lime and pebbles.
It was an attractive place; one might almost have taken it for the abode
of a substantial bourgeois.

Germain's prospective father-in-law came to meet him, and, after five
minutes spent in questioning him concerning his whole family, he added
this phrase, invariably used to question courteously those whom one
meets as to the object of their journey: "So you have come out this way
for a little ride, eh?"

"I came to see you," replied the ploughman, "and to offer you this
little gift of game from my father-in-law, and to say, also from him,
that you would know my purpose in coming."

"Ha! ha!" laughed Père Léonard, patting his round paunch, "I see, I
hear, I understood!" And he added, with a wink: "You'll not be alone in
paying your respects, my young friend. There are three in the house
already, dancing attendance like you. I don't turn anybody away, and I
should be hard put to it to decide against any one of them, for they're
all good matches. However, on account of Pere Maurice and the quality of
your lands, I should prefer you. But my daughter's of age and mistress
of her own property; so she will do as she pleases. Go in and introduce
yourself; I hope you may draw the lucky number!"

"Pardon, excuse me," replied Germain, greatly surprised to find himself
one of several, where he had expected to be alone. "I didn't know that
your daughter was already provided with suitors, and I didn't come to
dispute for her with others."

"If you thought that because you were slow in coming," retorted Père
Léonard, with undiminished good-humor, "you would catch my daughter
napping, you made a very great mistake, my boy. Catherine has something
to attract husbands with, and she'll have only too many to choose from.
But go into the house, I tell you, and don't lose courage. She's a woman
worth disputing for."

And, pushing Germain by the shoulders with rough good-humor, "Here,
Catherine," he cried, entering the house, "here's one more!"

This jovial but vulgar manner of being introduced to the widow, in the
presence of her other suitors, put the finishing touch to the
ploughman's confusion and annoyance. He felt ill at ease, and stood for
some moments without venturing to turn his eyes on the fair one and her
court.

The Widow Guérin was well made, and did not lack freshness. But the
expression of her face and her costume repelled Germain at the first
glance. She had a forward, self-satisfied air, and her mob-cap trimmed
with a triple row of lace, her silk apron, and her black lace fichu were
decidedly not in harmony with the idea he had conceived of a sedate,
serious-minded widow.

This elegance in dress and her free and easy manners made her appear
old and ugly to him, although she was neither. He thought that such
coquettish attire and such playful manners would be well suited to the
age and keen wit of little Marie, but that such pleasantry on the
widow's part was heavy and stale, and that there was no distinction in
the way she wore her fine clothes.

The three suitors were sitting at a table laden with food and wine,
which were kept there for them through the whole of Sunday morning; for
Père Léonard loved to exhibit his opulence, nor was the widow sorry to
display her fine plate and to keep open house like a woman of means.
Germain, simple and trustful as he was, did not lack penetration in his
observation of things, and for the first time in his life he stood on
the defensive while drinking. Père Léonard had compelled him to take a
seat with his rivals, and, seating himself opposite him, he treated him
as handsomely as possible, and devoted himself to him with evident
partiality. The gift of game, despite the breach Germain had made in it
on his own account, was still considerable enough to produce an effect.
The widow seemed to appreciate it, and the suitors eyed it disdainfully.

Germain felt ill at ease in that company, and did not eat with any
heartiness. Père Léonard rallied him about it.--"You seem very down in
the mouth," he said, "and you're sulking with your glass. You mustn't
let love spoil your appetite, for a fasting lover can't find so many
pretty things to say as the man who has sharpened up his wits with a
mouthful of wine."

Germain was mortified that it should be assumed that he was in love; and
the affected demeanor of the widow, who lowered her eyes with a smile,
like one who is sure of her game, made him long to protest against his
alleged surrender; but he feared to seem discourteous, so he smiled and
took patience.

The widow's lovers seemed to him like three rustic clowns. They must
have been rich, or she would not have listened to their suits. One of
them was more than forty, and was about as stout as Père Léonard;
another had but one eye, and drank so much that it made him stupid; the
third was young and not a bad-looking fellow; but he attempted to be
witty, and said such insane things that one could but pity him. But the
widow laughed as if she admired all his idiotic remarks, and therein she
gave no proof of good taste. Germain thought at first that she was in
love with the young man; but he soon perceived that he was himself the
recipient of marked encouragement, and that she wished him to yield more
readily to her charms. That was to him a reason for feeling and
appearing even colder and more solemn.

The hour of Mass arrived, and they left the table to attend in a body.
They had to go to Mers, a good half-league away, and Germain was so
tired that he would have been glad of an opportunity to take a nap
first: but he was not in the habit of being absent from Mass, and he
started with the others.

The roads were filled with people, and the widow walked proudly along,
escorted by her three suitors, taking the arm of one, then of another,
bridling up and carrying her head high. She would have been very glad to
exhibit the fourth to the passers-by; but it seemed so ridiculous to be
paraded thus in company by a petticoat, in everybody's sight, that he
kept at a respectful distance, talking with Père Léonard and finding a
way to divert his thoughts and occupy his mind so that they did not seem
to belong to the party.




XIII

THE MASTER


When they reached the village, the widow stopped to wait for them. She
was determined to make her entry with her whole suite; but Germain,
refusing to afford her that satisfaction, left Père Léonard, spoke with
several people of his acquaintance, and entered the church by another
door. The widow was vexed with him.

After the Mass, she made her appearance in triumph on the greensward
where dancing was in progress, and opened three successive dances with
her three lovers. Germain watched her, and concluded that she danced
well, but with affectation.

"Well!" said Léonard, clapping him on the shoulder, "so you don't ask my
daughter to dance? You are altogether too bashful!"

"I don't dance since I lost my wife," the ploughman replied.

"Oh! but when you're looking for another, mourning's at an end in your
heart as well as in your clothes."

"That's no argument, Père Léonard; besides, I feel too old, I don't care
for dancing any more."

"Hark ye," rejoined Léonard, leading him apart, "you took offence when
you entered my house, because you found the citadel already surrounded
by besiegers, and I see that you're very proud; but that isn't
reasonable, my boy. My daughter's used to being courted, especially
these last two years since her mourning came to an end, and it isn't her
place to make advances to you."

"Your daughter has been free to marry again for two years, you say, and
hasn't made up her mind yet?" said Germain.

"She doesn't choose to hurry, and she's right. Although she has rather a
lively way with her, and you may think she doesn't reflect much, she's a
woman of great good sense and one who knows very well what she's about."

"I don't see how that can be," said Germain ingenuously, "for she has
three gallants in her train, and if she knew what she wanted, at least
two of them would seem to her to be in the way and she would request
them to stay at home."

"Why so? you don't know anything about it, Germain. She doesn't want
either the old man or the one-eyed one or the young one, I'm almost
certain of it; but if she should turn them away, people would say she
meant to remain a widow and no others would come."

"Ah, yes! they act as a sign-post for her!"

"As you say. Where's the harm if they like it?"

"Every one to his taste!" said Germain.

"That wouldn't be to your taste, I see. But come, now, we can come to an
understanding: supposing that she prefers you, the field could be left
clear for you."

"Yes, supposing! And how long must I stand with my nose in the air
before I can find out?"

"That depends on yourself, I fancy, if you know how to talk and argue.
So far my daughter has understood very clearly that the best part of her
life would be the part that she passed in letting men court her, and she
doesn't feel in any hurry to become one man's servant when she can give
orders to several. And so, as long as the game pleases her, she can
divert herself with it; but if you please her more than the game, the
game may be stopped. All you have to do is not to be discouraged. Come
every Sunday, ask her to dance, give her to understand that you're on
the list, and if she finds you more likeable and better informed than
the others, I don't doubt that she'll tell you so some fine day."

"Excuse me, Père Léonard, your daughter is entitled to act as she
pleases, and I have no right to blame her. I would act differently if I
were in her place; I'd be more honest, and I wouldn't let men throw away
their time who probably have something better to do than hang around a
woman who laughs at them. But, after all, if that entertains her and
makes her happy, it's none of my business. But I must tell you one thing
that is a little embarrassing for me to confess since this morning,
seeing that you began by making a mistake as to my intentions and didn't
give me any time to reply; so that you believe something that isn't so.
Pray understand that I didn't come here to ask for your daughter's hand,
but to buy a pair of oxen that you intend to take to the fair next week
and that my father-in-law thinks will suit him."

"I understand, Germain," said Léonard calmly; "you changed your mind
when you saw my daughter with her lovers. That's as you please. It seems
that what attracts one repels another, and you have the right to
withdraw as long as you haven't spoken yet. If you really want to buy
my oxen, come and look at them in the pasture; we'll talk it over, and
whether we strike a bargain or not, you'll come and take dinner with us
before you go back."

"I don't want you to put yourself out," replied Germain, "perhaps you
have business here; I'm a little tired of watching them dance and of
doing nothing. I'll go to look at your cattle, and join you later at
your house."

Thereupon, Germain slipped away and walked toward the meadows, where
Léonard had pointed out some of his beasts in the distance. It was true
that Père Maurice wanted to buy, and Germain thought that if he should
take back a good yoke at a moderate price, he would be pardoned more
readily for having voluntarily failed to accomplish the real object of
his journey.

He walked fast, and was soon within a short distance of Ormeaux.
Thereupon he felt that he must go and kiss his son and see little Marie
once more, although he had lost the hope and banished from his mind the
thought of owing his happiness to her. All that he had seen and
heard--the vain, giddy woman; the father, at once cunning and shallow,
who encouraged his daughter in her pride and disingenuous habits; the
imitation of city luxury, which seemed to him an offence against the
dignity of country manners; the time wasted in indolent, foolish
conversation, that household so different from his own, and, above all,
the profound discomfort that the husbandman feels when he lays aside his
laborious habits; all the _ennui_ and annoyance he had undergone within
the last few hours--made Germain long to be once more with his child and
his little neighbor. Even if he had not been in love with the latter, he
would have sought her none the less for distraction, and to restore his
mind to its accustomed channels.

But he looked in vain in the neighboring fields, he saw neither little
Marie nor little Pierre; and yet it was the time when the shepherds are
in the fields. There was a large flock in a pasture; he asked a young
boy who was tending them if the sheep belonged to the farm of Ormeaux.

"Yes," said the child.

"Are you the shepherd? do boys tend woolly beasts for the farmers in
your neighborhood?"

"No. I'm tending 'em to-day because the shepherdess has gone away: she
was sick."

"But haven't you a new shepherdess who came this morning?"

"Oh! yes! she's gone, too, already."

"What! gone? didn't she have a child with her?"

"Yes, a little boy; he cried. They both went away after they'd been here
two hours."

"Where did they go?"

"Where they came from, I suppose. I didn't ask 'em."

"But what did they go away for?" said Germain, with increasing anxiety.

"Why, how do I know?"

"Didn't they agree about wages? but that must have been agreed on
beforehand."

"I can't tell you anything about it. I saw them go in and come out,
that's all."

Germain went on to the farm and questioned the farm-hands. No one could
explain what had happened; but all agreed that, after talking with the
farmer, the girl had gone away without saying a word, taking with her
the child, who was weeping.

"Did they ill-treat my son?" cried Germain, his eyes flashing fire.

"He was your son, was he? How did he come to be with that girl? Where
are you from, and what's your name?"

Germain, seeing that his questions were answered by other questions,
according to the custom of the country, stamped his foot impatiently,
and asked to speak with the master.

The master was not there: he was not in the habit of staying the whole
day when he came to the farm. He had mounted his horse, and ridden off
to some other of his farms.

"But surely you can find out the reason of that young girl's going
away?" said Germain, assailed by keen anxiety.

The farm-hand exchanged a strange smile with his wife, then replied that
he knew nothing about it, that it did not concern him. All that Germain
could learn was that the girl and the child had gone in the direction of
Fourche. He hurried to Fourche: the widow and her lovers had not
returned, nor had Père Léonard. The servant told him that a young girl
and a child had come there and inquired for him, but that she, not
knowing them, thought it best not to admit them and advised them to go
to Mers.

"Why did you refuse to let them in?" said Germain angrily. "Are you so
suspicious in these parts that you don't open your door to your
neighbor?"

"Oh! bless me!" the servant replied, "in a rich house like this, one
has to keep a sharp lookout. I am responsible for everything when the
masters are away, and I can't open the door to everybody that comes."

"That's a vile custom," said Germain, "and I'd rather be poor than live
in fear like that. Adieu, girl! adieu to your wretched country!"

He inquired at the neighboring houses. Everybody had seen the
shepherdess and the child. As the little one had left Belair
unexpectedly, without being dressed for the occasion, with a torn blouse
and his little lamb's fleece over his shoulders; and as little Marie was
necessarily very shabbily dressed at all times, they had been taken for
beggars. Some one had offered them bread; the girl had accepted a piece
for the child, who was hungry, then she had walked away very fast with
him and had gone into the woods.

Germain reflected a moment, then asked if the farmer from Ormeaux had
not come to Fourche.

"Yes," was the reply; "he rode by on horseback a few minutes after the
girl."

"Did he ride after her?"

"Ah! you know him, do you?" laughed the village innkeeper, to whom he
had applied for information.

"Yes, to be sure; he's a devil of a fellow for running after the girls.
But I don't believe he caught that one; although, after all, if he had
seen her--"

"That's enough, thanks!" And he flew rather than ran to Leonard's
stable. He threw the saddle on Grise's back, leaped upon her, and
galloped away in the direction of the woods of Chanteloube.

His heart was beating fast with anxiety and wrath, the perspiration
rolled down his forehead. He covered Grise's sides with blood, although
the mare, when she found that she was on the way to her stable, did not
need to be urged to go at full speed.




XIV

THE OLD WOMAN


Germain soon found himself at the spot on the edge of the pool where he
had passed the night. The fire was still smoking; an old woman was
picking up what was left of the dead wood Marie had collected. Germain
stopped to question her. She was deaf, and misunderstood his questions.

"Yes, my boy," she said, "this is the Devil's Pool. It's a bad place,
and you mustn't come near it without throwing three stones in with your
left hand and crossing yourself with your right: that drives away the
spirits. Unless they do that, misfortune comes to those who walk around
it."

"I didn't ask you about that," said Germain, drawing nearer to her and
shouting at the top of his voice: "Haven't you seen a girl and a young
child going through the woods?"

"Yes," said the old woman, "there was a small child drowned there!"

Germain shivered from head to foot; but luckily the old woman added:

"That was a long, long while ago; they put up a beautiful cross; but on
a fine stormy night the evil spirits threw it into the water. You can
still see one end of it. If any one had the bad luck to stop here at
night, he would be very sure not to be able to go away before dawn. It
would do him no good to walk, walk: he might travel two hundred leagues
through the woods and find himself still in the same place."--The
ploughman's imagination was impressed, do what he would, by what he
heard, and the idea of the misfortune which might follow, to justify the
remainder of the old woman's assertions, took such complete possession
of his brain that he felt cold all over his body. Despairing of
obtaining any additional information, he mounted his horse and began to
ride through the woods, calling Pierre at the top of his voice,
whistling, cracking his whip, breaking off branches to fill the forest
with the noise of his progress, then listening to see if any voice
answered; but he heard naught but the bells on the cows scattered among
the bushes, and the fierce grunting of pigs fighting over the acorns.

At last, Germain heard behind him the footsteps of a horse following in
his track, and a man of middle age, swarthy, robust, dressed like a
semi-bourgeois, shouted to him to stop. Germain had never seen the
farmer of Ormeaux; but an angry instinct led him to determine at once
that it was he. He turned, and, eyeing him from head to foot, waited to
hear what he had to say to him.

"Haven't you seen a young girl of fifteen or sixteen, with a little boy,
pass this way?" said the farmer, affecting an indifferent manner,
although he was visibly moved.

"What do you want of her?" demanded Germain, not seeking to disguise his
indignation.

"I might tell you that that was none of your business, my friend, but as
I have no reason to hide it, I will tell you that she's a shepherdess I
hired for the year without knowing her.--When she came to the farm, she
seemed to me too young and not strong enough for the work. I thanked
her, but I insisted on paying her what her little journey had cost; and
she went off in a rage while my back was turned.--She was in such a
hurry that she even forgot part of her things and her purse, which
hasn't very much in it, to be sure; a few sous, I suppose!--but as I had
business in this direction, I thought I might meet her and give her what
she forgot and what I owe her."

Germain was too honest a soul not to hesitate when he heard that story,
which was possible at least, if not very probable. He fixed a piercing
gaze on the farmer, who bore his scrutiny with much impudence or else
with perfect innocence.

"I want to have a clear conscience," said Germain to himself, and,
restraining his indignation, he continued aloud:

"She's a girl from our neighborhood; I know her: she must be somewhere
about here. Let us go on together--we shall find her, I've no doubt."

"You are right," said the farmer. "Let's go on--but, if we don't find
her at the end of the path, I give it up--for I must take the Ardentes
road."

"Oho!" thought the ploughman, "I won't leave you! even if I should have
to twist around the Devil's Pool with you for twenty-four hours!"

"Stay!" said Germain suddenly, fixing his eyes on a clump of furze which
was moving back and forth in a peculiar way: "holà! holà! Petit-Pierre,
my child, is that you?"

The child, recognizing his father's voice, leaped out of the bushes like
a kid, but when he saw that he was with the farmer, he stopped as if in
terror, and stood still, uncertain what to do.

"Come, my Pierre, come, it's me!" cried the ploughman, riding toward him
and leaping down from his horse to take him in his arms: "and where's
little Marie?"

"She's hiding there, because she's afraid of that bad black man, and so
am I."

"Oh! don't you be afraid; I am here--Marie! Marie! it's me!"

Marie came crawling out from the bushes, and as soon as she saw Germain,
whom the farmer was following close, she ran and threw herself into his
arms; and, clinging to him like a daughter to her father, she exclaimed:

"Ah! my good Germain, you will defend me; I'm not afraid with you."

Germain shuddered. He looked at Marie: she was pale, her clothes were
torn by the brambles through which she had run, seeking the thickest
underbrush, like a doe with the hunters on her track. But there was
neither despair nor shame on her face.

"Your master wants to speak to you," he said, still watching her
features.

"My master?" she said proudly; "that man is not my master and never will
be!--You are my master, you, Germain. I want you to take me back with
you--will work for you for nothing!"

The farmer had ridden forward, feigning some impatience.

"Ah! little one," he said, "you forgot something which I have brought
you."

"No, no, monsieur," replied little Marie, "I didn't forget anything, and
there's nothing I want to ask you for--"

"Hark ye a minute," said the farmer, "I have something to say to
you!--Come!--don't be afraid--just two words."

"You can say them out loud. I have no secrets with you."

"Come and get your money, at least."

"My money? You don't owe me anything, thank God!"

"I suspected as much," said Germain in an undertone; "but never mind,
Marie, listen to what he has to say to you--for, for my part, I am
curious to find out. You can tell me afterward: I have my reasons for
that. Go beside his horse--I won't lose sight of you."

Marie took three steps toward the farmer, who said to her, leaning
forward on the pommel of his saddle, and lowering his voice:

"Here's a bright louis-d'or for you, little one! you won't say anything,
understand? I'll say that I concluded you weren't strong enough for the
work on my farm.--And don't let anything more be said about it. I'll
come and see you again one of these days, and if you haven't said
anything, I'll give you something else. And then, if you're more
reasonable, you'll only have to say the word: I will take you home with
me, or else come and talk with you in the pasture at dusk. What present
shall I bring you?"

"There is my gift to you, monsieur!" replied little Marie aloud,
throwing his louis-d'or in his face with no gentle hand. "I thank you
very much, and I beg you to let me know beforehand when you are coming
our way: all the young men in my neighborhood will turn out to receive
you, because our people are very fond of bourgeois who try to make love
to poor girls! You'll see, they'll be on the lookout for you!"

"You're a liar and a silly babbler!" said the farmer in a rage, raising
his stick threateningly. "You'd like to make people believe what isn't
true, but you won't get any money out of me: I know your kind!"

Marie had recoiled in terror; but Germain darted to the farmer's horse's
head, seized the rein, and shook it vigorously:

"I understand now!" he said, "and I see plainly enough what the trouble
was. Dismount! my man! come down and let us have a talk!"

The farmer was by no means anxious to take a hand in the game: he
spurred his horse in order to free himself, and tried to strike the
ploughman's hands with his stick and make him relax his hold; but
Germain eluded the blow, and, taking him by the leg, unhorsed him and
brought him to the heather, where he knocked him down, although the
farmer was soon upon his feet again and defended himself sturdily.

[Illustration: Chapter XIV

_Marie had recoiled in terror; but Germain darted to the farmer's
horse's head, seized the rein, and shook it vigorously._]

"Coward!" said Germain, when he had him beneath him, "I could break
every bone in your body if I chose! But I don't like to harm anybody,
and besides, no punishment would mend your conscience. However, you
shan't stir from this spot until you have asked this girl's pardon on
your knees."

The farmer, who was familiar with affairs of that sort, tried to turn it
off as a joke. He claimed that his offence was not so very serious, as
it consisted only in words, and said that he was willing to beg the
girl's pardon, on condition that he might kiss her and that they should
all go and drink a pint of wine at the nearest inn and part good
friends.

"You disgust me!" replied Germain, pressing his face against the ground,
"and I long to see the last of your ugly face. There, blush if you can,
and you had better take the road of the _affronteux_[2] when you come to
our town."

He picked up the farmer's holly staff, broke it across his knee to show
the strength of his wrists, and threw the pieces away with a
contemptuous gesture.

Then, taking his son's hand in one of his, and little Marie's in the
other, he walked away, trembling with indignation.




XV

THE RETURN TO THE FARM


Within a quarter of an hour they had crossed the moors. They trotted
along the high-road, and Grise neighed at every familiar object.
Petit-Pierre told his father what had taken place so far as he had been
able to understand it.

"When we got there," he said, "_that man_ came and talked to _my Marie_
in the sheepfold, where we went first to see the fine sheep. I'd got up
into the crib to play, and _that man_ didn't see me. Then he said
good-day to my Marie and then he kissed her."

"You let him kiss you, Marie?" said Germain, trembling with anger.

"I thought it was a compliment, a custom of the place for new arrivals,
just as grandma, at your house, kisses the girls who take service with
her, to show that she adopts them and will be like a mother to them."

"And then," continued Petit-Pierre, who was very proud to have a story
to tell, "_that man_ said something naughty, something you told me not
to say and not to remember: so I forgot it right away. But if my papa
wants me to tell him what it was--"

"No, my Pierre, I don't want to hear it, and I don't want you to
remember it ever."

"Then I'll forget it again," said the child. "And then _that man_ acted
as if he was mad because Marie said she was going away. He told her he'd
give her all she wanted,--a hundred francs! And my Marie got mad, too.
Then he went at her, just like he was going to hurt her. I was afraid,
and I ran up to Marie and cried. Then _that man_ said like this: 'What's
that? where did that child come from? Put him out of here.' And he put
up his stick to beat me. But my Marie stopped him, and she said like
this: 'We will talk by and by, monsieur; now I must take this child to
Fourche, and then I'll come back again.' And as soon as he'd gone out of
the sheepfold, my Marie says to me like this: 'Let's run away, my
Pierre, we must go away right off, for that man's a bad man, and he
would only hurt us.'--Then we went behind the barns and crossed a little
field and went to Fourche to look for you. But you weren't there, and
they wouldn't let us wait for you. And then _that man_ came up behind
us on his black horse, and we ran still farther away, and then we went
and hid in the woods. Then he came, too, and we hid when we heard him
coming. And then, when he'd gone by, we began to run for ourselves so as
to go home; and then at last you came and found us; and that's all there
was. I didn't forget anything, did I, my Marie?"

"No, Pierre, and it's the truth. Now, Germain, you will bear witness for
me and tell everybody at home that it wasn't for lack of courage and
being willing to work that I couldn't stay over yonder."

"And I will ask you, Marie," said Germain, "to ask yourself the
question, whether, when it comes to defending a woman and punishing a
knave, a man of twenty-eight isn't too old? I'd like to know if Bastien,
or any other pretty boy who has the advantage of being ten years younger
than I am, wouldn't have been crushed by _that man_, as Petit-Pierre
calls him: what do you think about it?"

"I think, Germain, that you have done me a very great service, and that
I shall thank you for it all my life."

"Is that all?"

"My little father," said the child, "I didn't think to tell little Marie
what I promised you. I didn't have time, but I'll tell her at home, and
I'll tell grandma, too."

This promise on his child's part gave Germain abundant food for
reflection. The problem now was how to explain his position to his
family, and while setting forth his grievances against the widow Guérin,
to avoid telling them what other thoughts had predisposed him to be so
keen-sighted and so harsh in his judgment.

When one is happy and proud, the courage to make others accept one's
happiness seems easily within reach; but to be rebuffed in one direction
and blamed in another is not a very pleasant plight.

Luckily, Pierre was asleep when they reached the farm, and Germain put
him down on his bed without waking him. Then he entered upon such
explanations as he was able to give. Père Maurice, sitting upon his
three-legged stool in the doorway, listened gravely to him, and,
although he was ill pleased with the result of the expedition, when
Germain, after describing the widow's system of coquetry, asked his
father in-law if he had time to go and pay court to her fifty-two
Sundays in the year with the chance of being dismissed at the end of the
year, the old man replied, nodding his head in token of assent: "You are
not wrong, Germain; that couldn't be." And again, when Germain told how
he had been compelled to bring little Marie home again without loss of
time to save her from the insults, perhaps from the violence, of an
unworthy master, Père Maurice again nodded assent, saying: "You are not
wrong, Germain; that's as it should be."

When Germain had finished his story and given all his reasons, his
father-in-law and mother-in-law simultaneously uttered a heavy sigh of
resignation as they exchanged glances.

Then the head of the family rose, saying: "Well! God's will be done!
affection isn't made to order!"

"Come to supper, Germain," said the mother-in-law. "It's a pity that
couldn't be arranged better; however, it wasn't God's will, it seems. We
must look somewhere else."

"Yes," the old man added, "as my wife says, we must look somewhere
else."

There was no further sound in the house, and when Petit-Pierre rose the
next morning with the larks, at dawn, being no longer excited by the
extraordinary events of the last two days, he relapsed into the normal
apathy of little peasants of his age, forgot all that had filled his
little head, and thought of nothing but playing with his brothers, and
_being a man_ with the horses and oxen.

Germain tried to forget, too, by plunging into his work again; but he
became so melancholy and so absent-minded that everybody noticed it. He
did not speak to little Marie, he did not even look at her; and yet, if
any one had asked him in which pasture she was, or in what direction she
had gone, there was not an hour in the day when he could not have told
if he had chosen to reply. He had not dared ask his people to take her
on at the farm during the winter, and yet he was well aware that she
must be suffering from poverty. But she was not suffering, and Mère
Guillette could never understand why her little store of wood never grew
less, and how her shed was always filled in the morning when she had
left it almost empty the night before. It was the same with the wheat
and potatoes. Some one came through the window in the loft, and emptied
a bag on the floor without waking anybody or leaving any tracks. The old
woman was anxious and rejoiced at the same time; she bade her daughter
not mention the matter, saying that if people knew what was happening in
her house they would take her for a witch. She really believed that the
devil had a hand in it, but she was by no means eager to fall out with
him by calling upon the curé to exorcise him from her house; she said to
herself that it would be time to do that when Satan came and demanded
her soul in exchange for his benefactions.

Little Marie had a clearer idea of the truth, but she dared not speak to
Germain for fear that he would recur to his idea of marriage, and she
pretended when with him to notice nothing.




XVI

MÈRE MAURICE


One day, Mère Maurice, being alone in the orchard with Germain, said to
him affectionately: "My poor son, I don't think you're well. You don't
eat as much as usual, you never laugh, and you talk less and less. Has
any one in the house, have we ourselves wounded you, without meaning to
do it or knowing that we had done it?"

"No, mother," replied Germain, "you have always been as kind to me as
the mother who brought me into the world, and I should be an ungrateful
fellow if I complained of you, or your husband, or any one in the
house."

"In that case, my child, it must be that your grief for your wife's
death has come back. Instead of lessening with time, your loneliness
grows worse, and you absolutely must do what your father-in-law very
wisely advised, you must marry again."

"Yes, mother, that would be my idea, too; but the women you advised me
to seek don't suit me. When I see them, instead of forgetting Catherine,
I think of her all the more."

"The trouble apparently is, Germain, that we haven't succeeded in
divining your taste. So you must help us by telling us the truth.
Doubtless there's a woman somewhere who was made for you, for the good
Lord doesn't make anybody without putting by his happiness for him in
somebody else. So if you know where to go for the wife you need, go and
get her; and whether she's pretty or ugly, young or old, rich or poor,
we have made up our minds, my old man and I, to give our consent; for
we're tired of seeing you so sad, and we can't live at peace if you are
not."

"You are as good as the good Lord, mother, and so is father," replied
Germain; "but your compassion can't cure my trouble: the girl I would
like won't have me."

"Is it because she's too young? It's unwise for you to put your thoughts
on a young girl."


"Well, yes, mother, I am foolish enough to have become attached to a
young girl, and I blame myself for it. I do all I can not to think of
her; but whether I am at work or resting, whether I am at Mass or in my
bed, with my children or with you, I think of her all the time, and
can't think of anything else."

"Why, it's as if there'd been a spell cast on you, Germain, isn't it?
There's only one cure for it, and that is to make the girl change her
mind and listen to you. So I must take a hand in it, and see if it can
be done. You tell me where she lives and what her name is."

"Alas! my dear mother, I don't dare," said Germain, "for you'll laugh at
me."

"No, I won't laugh at you, Germain, because you're in trouble, and I
don't want to make it any worse for you. Can it be Fanchette?"

"No, mother, not her."

"Or Rosette?"

"No."

"Tell me, then, for I won't stop, if I have to name all the girls in the
province."

Germain hung his head, and could not make up his mind to reply.

"Well," said Mère Maurice, "I leave you in peace for to-day, Germain;
perhaps to-morrow you will feel more like trusting me, or your
sister-in-law will show more skill in questioning you."

And she picked up her basket to go and stretch her linen on the bushes.

Germain acted like children who make up their minds when they see that
you have ceased to pay any attention to them. He followed his
mother-in-law, and at last gave her the name in fear and trembling--_La
Guillette's little Marie_.

Great was Mère Maurice's surprise: she was the last one of whom she
would have thought. But she had the delicacy not to cry out at it, and
to make her comments mentally. Then, seeing that her silence was
oppressive to Germain, she held out her basket to him, saying: "Well, is
that any reason why you shouldn't help me in my work? Carry this load,
and come and talk with me. Have you reflected, Germain? have you made up
your mind?"

"Alas! my dear mother, that's not the way you must talk: my mind would
be made up if I could succeed; but as I shouldn't be listened to, I have
made up my mind simply to cure myself if I can."

"And if you can't?"

"Everything in its time, Mère Maurice: when the horse is overloaded, he
falls; and when the ox has nothing to eat, he dies."

"That is to say that you will die if you don't succeed, eh? God forbid,
Germain! I don't like to hear a man like you say such things as that,
because when he says them he thinks them. You're a very brave man, and
weakness is a dangerous thing in strong men. Come, take hope. I can't
imagine how a poor girl, who is much honored by having you want her, can
refuse you."

"It's the truth, though, she does refuse me."

"What reasons does she give you?"

"That you have always been kind to her, that her family owes a great
deal to yours, and that she doesn't want to displease you by turning me
away from a wealthy marriage."

"If she says that, she shows good feeling, and it's very honest on her
part. But when she tells you that, Germain, she doesn't cure you, for
she tells you she loves you, I don't doubt, and that she'd marry you if
we were willing."

"That's the worst of it! she says that her heart isn't drawn toward me."

"If she says what she doesn't mean, the better to keep you away from
her, she's a child who deserves to have us love her and to have us
overlook her youth because of her great common-sense."

"Yes," said Germain, struck with a hope he had not before conceived;
"it would be very good and very _comme il faut_ on her part! but if
she's so sensible, I am very much afraid it's because she doesn't like
me."

"Germain," said Mère Maurice, "you must promise to keep quiet the whole
week and not worry, but eat and sleep, and be gay as you used to be.
I'll speak to my old man, and if I bring him round, then you can find
out the girl's real feeling with regard to you."

Germain promised, and the week passed without Père Maurice saying a word
to him in private or giving any sign that he suspected anything. The
ploughman tried hard to seem tranquil, but he was paler and more
perturbed than ever.




XVII

LITTLE MARIE


At last, on Sunday morning as they came out from Mass, his mother-in-law
asked him what he had obtained from his sweetheart since their interview
in the orchard.

"Why, nothing at all," he replied. "I haven't spoken to her."

"How do you expect to persuade her, pray, if you don't speak to her?"

"I have never spoken to her but once," said Germain. "That was when we
went to Fourche together; and since then I haven't said a single word to
her. Her refusal hurt me so, that I prefer not to hear her tell me again
that she doesn't love me."

"Well, my son, you must speak to her now; your father-in-law authorizes
you to do it. Come, make up your mind! I tell you to do it, and, if
necessary, I insist on it; for you can't remain in this state of doubt."

Germain obeyed. He went to Mère Guillette's, with downcast eyes and an
air of profound depression. Little Marie was alone in the
chimney-corner, musing so deeply that she did not hear Germain come in.
When she saw him before her, she leaped from her chair in surprise and
her face flushed.

"Little Marie," he said, sitting beside her, "I have pained you and
wearied you, I know; but _the man and the woman at our house_"--so
designating the heads of the family in accordance with custom--"want me
to speak to you and ask you to marry me. You won't be willing to do it,
I expect that."

"Germain," replied little Marie, "have you made up your mind that you
love me?"

"That offends you, I know, but it isn't my fault; if you could change
your mind, I should be too happy, and I suppose I don't deserve to have
it so. Come, look at me, Marie, am I so very frightful?"

"No, Germain," she replied, with a smile, "you're better looking than I
am."

"Don't laugh at me; look at me indulgently; I haven't lost a hair or a
tooth yet. My eyes tell you that I love you. Look into my eyes, it's
written there, and every girl knows how to read that writing."

Marie looked into Germain's eyes with an air of playful assurance; then
she suddenly turned her head away and began to tremble.

"Ah! _mon Dieu!_ I frighten you," said Germain; "you look at me as if I
were the farmer of Ormeaux. Don't be afraid of me, I beg of you, that
hurts me too much. I won't say bad words to you, I won't kiss you
against your will, and when you want me to go away, you have only to
show me the door. Tell me, must I go out so that you can stop
trembling?"

Marie held out her hand to the ploughman, but without turning her head,
which was bent toward the fire-place, and without speaking.

"I understand," said Germain; "you pity me, for you are kind-hearted;
you are sorry to make me unhappy; but still you can't love me, can you?"

"Why do you say such things to me, Germain?" little Marie replied at
last, "do you want to make me cry?"

"Poor little girl, you have a kind heart, I know; but you don't love me,
and you hide your face from me because you're afraid to let me see your
displeasure and your repugnance. And for my part, I don't dare do so
much as press your hand! In the woods, when my son was asleep, and you
were asleep too, I came near kissing you softly. But I should have died
of shame rather than ask you for a kiss, and I suffered as much that
night as a man roasting over a slow fire. Since then, I've dreamed of
you every night. Ah! how I have kissed you, Marie! But you slept without
dreaming all the time. And now do you know what I think? that if you
should turn and look at me with such eyes as I have for you, and if you
should put your face to mine, I believe I should fall dead with joy. And
as for you, you are thinking that if such a thing should happen to you,
you would die of anger and shame!"

Germain talked as if he were dreaming, and did not know what he said.
Little Marie was still trembling; but as he was trembling even more than
she, he did not notice it. Suddenly she turned; she was all in tears,
and looked at him with a reproachful expression.

The poor ploughman thought that that was the last stroke, and rose to
go, without awaiting his sentence, but the girl detained him by throwing
her arms about him, and hid her face against his breast.

"Ah! Germain," she said, sobbing, "haven't you guessed that I love you?"

Germain would have gone mad, had not his son, who was looking for him
and who entered the cottage galloping on a stick, with his little sister
_en croupe_, lashing the imaginary steed with a willow switch, recalled
him to himself. He lifted him up, and said, as he put him in his
fiancée's arms:

"You have made more than one person happy by loving me!"




APPENDIX

I

THE COUNTRY WEDDING


Here ends the story of Germain's courtship, as he told it to me himself,
cunning ploughman that he is! I ask your pardon, dear reader, for having
been unable to translate it better; for the old-fashioned, artless
language of the peasants of the district that _I sing_--as they used to
say--really has to be translated. Those people speak too much French for
us, and the development of the language since Rabelais and Montaigne has
deprived us of much of the old wealth. It is so with all progress, and
we must make up our minds to it. But it is pleasant still to hear those
picturesque idioms in general use on the old soil of the centre of
France; especially as they are the genuine expressions of the mockingly
tranquil and pleasantly loquacious character of the people who use them.
Touraine has preserved a considerable number of precious patriarchal
locutions. But Touraine has progressed rapidly in civilization during
and since the Renaissance. It is covered with châteaux, roads,
activity, and foreigners. Berry has remained stationary, and I think
that, next to Bretagne and some provinces in the extreme south of
France, it is the most _conservative_ province to be found at the
present moment. Certain customs are so strange, so curious, that I hope
to be able to entertain you a moment longer, dear reader, if you will
permit me to describe in detail a country wedding, Germain's for
instance, which I had the pleasure of attending a few years ago.

For everything passes away, alas! In the short time that I have lived,
there has been more change in the ideas and customs of my village than
there was for centuries before the Revolution. Half of the Celtic,
pagan, or Middle-Age ceremonials that I saw in full vigor in my
childhood, have already been done away with. Another year or two,
perhaps, and the railroads will run their levels through our deep
valleys, carrying away, with the swiftness of lightning, our ancient
traditions and our wonderful legends.

It was in winter, not far from the Carnival, the time of year when it is
considered becoming and proper, among us, to be married. In the summer,
we hardly have time, and the work on a farm cannot be postponed three
days, to say nothing of the extra days required for the more or less
laborious digestion attending the moral and physical intoxication that
follows such a festivity.--I was sitting under the huge mantel-piece of
an old-fashioned kitchen fire-place, when pistol-shots, the howling of
dogs, and the shrill notes of the bagpipe announced the approach of the
fiancés. Soon Père and Mère Maurice, Germain, and little Marie, followed
by Jacques and his wife, the nearest relations of the bride and groom,
and their godfathers and godmothers, entered the court-yard.

Little Marie, not having as yet received the wedding-gifts, called
_livrées_, was dressed in the best that her modest wardrobe afforded: a
dress of dark-gray cloth, a white fichu with large bright-colored
flowers, an apron of the color called _incarnat_, an Indian red then
much in vogue but despised to-day, a cap of snow-white muslin and of the
shape, fortunately preserved, which recalls the head-dress of Anne
Boleyn and Agnès Sorel. She was fresh and smiling, and not at all proud,
although she had good reason to be. Germain was beside her, grave and
deeply moved, like the youthful Jacob saluting Rachel at Laban's well.
Any other girl would have assumed an air of importance and a triumphant
bearing; for in all ranks of life it counts for something to be married
for one's _beaux yeux_. But the girl's eyes were moist and beaming with
love; you could see that she was deeply smitten, and that she had no
time to think about the opinions of other people. She had not lost her
little determined manner; but she was all sincerity and good nature;
there was nothing impertinent in her success, nothing personal in her
consciousness of her strength. I never saw such a sweet fiancée as she
when she quickly answered some of her young friends who asked her if she
was content: "Bless me! indeed I am! I don't complain of the good Lord."

Père Maurice was the spokesman; he had come to offer the customary
compliments and invitations. He began by fastening a laurel branch
adorned with ribbons to the mantel-piece; that is called the _exploit_,
that is to say, the invitation; then he gave to each of the guests a
little cross made of a bit of blue ribbon crossed by another bit of pink
ribbon; the pink for the bride, the blue for the groom; and the guests
were expected to keep that token to wear on the wedding-day, the women
in their caps, the men in their button-holes. It was the ticket of
admission.

Then Père Maurice delivered his speech. He invited the master of the
house and all _his company_, that is to say, all his children, all his
relations, all his friends, all his servants, to the marriage-ceremony,
_to the feast, to the sports, to the dancing, and to everything that
comes after_. He did not fail to say:--I come _to do you the honor_ to
_invite_ you. A very proper locution, although it seems a misuse of
words to us, as it expresses the idea of rendering honor to those who
are deemed worthy thereof.

Despite the general invitation carried thus from house to house
throughout the parish, good-breeding, which is extremely conservative
among the peasantry, requires that only two persons in each family
should take advantage of it,--one of the heads of the family to
represent the household, one of their children to represent the other
members.

The invitations being delivered, the fiancés and their relations went to
the farm and dined together.

Little Marie tended her three sheep on the common land, and Germain
turned up the ground as if there were nothing in the air.

On the day before that fixed for the marriage, about two o'clock in the
afternoon, the musicians arrived, that is to say, the bagpipers and
viol-players, with their instruments decorated with long floating
ribbons, and playing a march written for the occasion, in a measure
somewhat slow for the feet of any but natives, but perfectly adapted to
the nature of the heavy ground and the hilly roads of that region.
Pistol-shots, fired by youths and children, announced the beginning of
the ceremony. The guests assembled one by one and danced on the
greensward in front of the house, for practice. When night had come,
they began to make strange preparations: they separated into two
parties, and when it was quite dark, they proceeded to the ceremony of
the _livrées_.

That ceremony was performed at the home of the fiancée, La Guillette's
cabin. La Guillette took with her her daughter, a dozen or more young
and pretty shepherdesses, her daughter's friends or relations, two or
three respectable matrons, neighbors with well-oiled tongues, quick at
retort, and unyielding observers of the ancient customs. Then she
selected a dozen sturdy champions, her relations and friends; and,
lastly, the old _hemp-beater_ of the parish, a fine and fluent talker,
if ever there was one.

The rôle played in Bretagne by the _bazvalan_, or village tailor, is
assumed in our country districts by the hemp-beater or the wool-carder,
the two professions being often united in a single person. He attends
all solemnities, sad or gay, because he is essentially erudite and a
fine speaker, and on such occasions it is always his part to act as
spokesman in order that certain formalities that have been observed from
time immemorial may be worthily performed. The wandering trades which
take men into the bosoms of other families and do not permit them to
concentrate their attention upon their own, are well calculated to make
them loquacious, entertaining, good talkers, and good singers.

The hemp-beater is peculiarly sceptical. He and another rustic
functionary, of whom we shall speak anon, the grave-digger, are always
the strong-minded men of the neighborhood. They have talked so much
about ghosts, and are so familiar with all the tricks of which those
mischievous spirits are capable, that they fear them hardly at all.
Night is the time when all three, hemp-beaters, grave-diggers, and
ghosts, principally exercise their callings. At night, too, the
hemp-beater tells his harrowing tales. May I be pardoned for a slight
digression.

When the hemp has reached the proper point, that is to say, when it has
been sufficiently soaked in running water and half dried on the bank,
it is carried to the yards of the different houses; there they stand it
up in little sheaves, which, with their stalks spread apart at the
bottom and their heads tied together in balls, greatly resemble, in the
dark, a long procession of little white phantoms, planted on their slim
legs and walking noiselessly along the walls.

At the end of September, when the nights are still warm, they begin the
process of beating, by the pale moonlight. During the day, the hemp has
been heated in the oven; it is taken out at night to be beaten hot. For
that purpose, they use a sort of wooden horse, surmounted by a wooden
lever, which, falling upon the grooves, breaks the plant without cutting
it. Then it is that you hear at night, in the country, the sharp,
clean-cut sound of three blows struck in rapid succession. Then there is
silence for a moment; that means that the arm is moving the handful of
hemp, in order to break it in another place. And the three blows are
repeated; it is the other arm acting on the lever, and so it goes on
until the moon is dimmed by the first rays of dawn. As this work is done
only a few days in the year, the dogs do not become accustomed to it,
and howl plaintively at every point of the compass.

It is the time for unusual and mysterious noises in the country. The
migrating cranes fly southward at such a height that the eye can hardly
distinguish them in broad daylight. At night, you can only hear them;
and their hoarse, complaining voices, lost among the clouds, seem like
the salutation and the farewell of souls in torment, striving to find
the road to heaven and compelled by an irresistible fatality to hover
about the abodes of men, not far from earth; for these migratory birds
exhibit strange uncertainty and mysterious anxiety in their aerial
wanderings. It sometimes happens that they lose the wind, when fitful
breezes struggle for the mastery or succeed one another in the upper
regions. Thereupon, when one of those reverses happens during the day,
we see the leader of the line soar at random through the air, then turn
sharply about, fly back, and take his place at the rear of the
triangular phalanx, while a skilful manoeuvre on the part of his
companions soon brings them into line behind him. Often, after vain
efforts, the exhausted leader abandons the command of the caravan;
another comes forward, takes his turn at the task, and gives place to a
third, who finds the current and leads the host forward in triumph. But
what shrieks, what reproaches, what remonstrances, what fierce
maledictions or anxious questions are exchanged by those winged pilgrims
in an unfamiliar tongue!

In the resonant darkness you hear the dismal uproar circling above the
houses sometimes for a long while; and as you can see nothing, you feel,
in spite of yourself, a sort of dread and a sympathetic uneasiness until
the sobbing flock has passed out of hearing in space.

There are other sounds that are peculiar to that time of year, and are
heard principally in the orchards. The fruit is not yet gathered, and a
thousand unaccustomed snappings and crackings make the trees resemble
animate beings. A branch creaks as it bends under a weight that has
suddenly reached the last stage of development; or an apple detaches
itself and falls at your feet with a dull thud on the damp ground. Then
you hear a creature whom you cannot see, brushing against the branches
and bushes as he runs away; it is the peasant's dog, the restless,
inquisitive prowler, impudent and cowardly as well, who insinuates
himself everywhere, never sleeps, is always hunting for nobody knows
what, watches you from his hiding-place in the bushes and runs away at
the noise made by a falling apple, thinking that you are throwing a
stone at him.

On such nights as those--gray, cloudy nights--the hemp-beater narrates
his strange adventures with will-o'-the-wisps and white hares, souls in
torment and witches transformed into wolves, the witches' dance at the
cross-roads and prophetic night-owls in the grave-yard. I remember
passing the early hours of the night thus around the moving flails,
whose pitiless blow, interrupting the beater's tale at the most exciting
point, caused a cold shiver to run through our veins. Often, too, the
goodman went on talking as he worked; and four or five words would be
lost: awful words, of course, which we dared not ask him to repeat, and
the omission of which imparted a more awe-inspiring mystery to the
mysteries, sufficiently harrowing before, of his narrative. In vain did
the servants warn us that it was very late to remain out-of-doors, and
that the hour for slumber had long since struck for us; they themselves
were dying with longing to hear more. And with what terror did we
afterward walk through the hamlet on our homeward way! how deep the
church porch seemed, and how dense and black the shadow of the old
trees! As for the grave-yard, that we did not see; we closed our eyes as
we passed it.

But the hemp-beater does not devote himself exclusively to frightening
his hearers any more than the sacristan does; he likes to make them
laugh, he is jocose and sentimental at need, when love and marriage are
to be sung; he it is who collects and retains in his memory the most
ancient ballads and transmits them to posterity. He it is, therefore,
who, at wedding-festivals, is entrusted with the character which we are
to see him enact at the presentation of the _livrées_ to little Marie.




II

THE LIVRÉES


When everybody was assembled in the house, the doors and windows were
closed and fastened with the greatest care; they even barricaded the
loop-hole in the attic; they placed boards, trestles, stumps, and tables
across all the issues as if they were preparing to sustain a siege; and
there was the solemn silence of suspense in that fortified interior
until they heard in the distance singing and laughing, and the notes of
the rustic instruments. It was the bridegroom's contingent, Germain at
the head, accompanied by his stoutest comrades, by his relations,
friends, and servants and the grave-digger,--a substantial, joyous
procession.

But, as they approached the house, they slackened their pace, took
counsel together, and became silent. The maidens, shut up in the house,
had arranged little cracks at the windows, through which they watched
them march up and form in battle-array. A fine, cold rain was falling,
and added to the interest of the occasion, while a huge fire was
crackling on the hearth inside. Marie would have liked to abridge the
inevitable tedious length of this formal siege; she did not like to see
her lover catching cold, but she had no voice in the council under the
circumstances, and, indeed, she was expected to join, ostensibly, in the
mischievous cruelty of her companions.

When the two camps were thus confronted, a discharge of fire-arms
without created great excitement among all the dogs in the neighborhood.
Those of the household rushed to the door barking vociferously, thinking
that a real attack was in progress, and the small children, whom their
mothers tried in vain to reassure, began to tremble and cry. The whole
scene was so well played that a stranger might well have been deceived
by it and have considered the advisability of preparing to defend
himself against a band of brigands.

Thereupon, the grave-digger, the bridegroom's bard and orator, took his
place in front of the door, and, in a lugubrious voice, began the
following dialogue with the hemp-beater, who was stationed at the small
round window above the same door:


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

Alas! my good people, my dear parishioners, for the love of God open the
door.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

Who are you, pray, and why do you presume to call us your dear
parishioners? We do not know you.


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

We are honest folk in sore distress. Be not afraid of us, my friends!
receive us hospitably. The rain freezes as it falls, our poor feet are
frozen, and we have come such a long distance that our shoes are split.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

If your shoes are split, you can look on the ground; you will surely
find osier withes to make _arcelets_ [little strips of iron in the shape
of bows, with which shoes (wooden) were mended].


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

Osier _arcelets_ are not very strong. You are making sport of us, good
people, and you would do better to open the door to us. We can see the
gleam of a noble blaze within your house; doubtless the spit is in
place, and your hearts and your stomachs are rejoicing together. Open,
then, to poor pilgrims, who will die at your door if you do not have
mercy on them.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

Aha! you are pilgrims? you did not tell us that. From what pilgrimage
are you returning, by your leave?


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

We will tell you that when you have opened the door, for we come from so
far away that you would not believe it.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

Open the door to you? indeed! we should not dare trust you. Let us see:
are you from Saint-Sylvain de Pouligny?


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

We have been to Saint-Sylvain de Pouligny, but we have been farther than
that.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

Then you have been as far as Sainte-Solange?


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

We have been to Sainte-Solange, for sure; but we have been farther
still.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

You lie; you have never been as far as Sainte-Solange.


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

We have been farther, for we have just returned from Saint-Jacques de
Compostelle.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

What foolish tale are you telling us? We don't know that parish. We see
plainly enough that you are bad men, brigands, _nobodies_, liars. Go
somewhere else and sing your silly songs; we are on our guard, and you
won't get in here.


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

Alas! my dear man, have pity on us! We are not pilgrims, as you have
rightly guessed; but we are unfortunate poachers pursued by the keepers.
The gendarmes are after us, too, and, if you don't let us hide in your
hay-loft, we shall be caught and taken to prison.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

But what proof have we this time that you are what you say? for here is
one falsehood already that you could not follow up.


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

If you will open the door, we will show you a fine piece of game we have
killed.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

Show it now, for we are suspicious.


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

Well, open a door or a window, so that we can pass in the creature.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

Oh! nay, nay! not such fools! I'm looking at you through a little hole,
and I see neither hunters nor game.

At that point, a drover's boy, a thick-set youth of herculean strength,
came forth from the group in which he had been standing unnoticed, and
held up toward the window a goose all plucked and impaled on a stout
iron spit, decorated with bunches of straw and ribbons.

"Hoity-toity!" cried the hemp-beater, after he had cautiously put out an
arm to feel the bird; "that's not a quail or a partridge, a hare or a
rabbit; it looks like a goose or a turkey. Upon my word, you are noble
hunters! and that game did not make you ride very fast. Go elsewhere,
my knaves! all your falsehoods are detected, and you may as well go home
and cook your supper. You won't eat ours."


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

Alas! _mon Dieu_! where shall we go to have our game cooked? it's very
little among so many of us; and, besides, we have no fire nor place to
go to. At this time of night, every door is closed, everybody has gone
to bed; you are the only ones who are having a wedding-feast in your
house, and you must be very hardhearted to leave us to freeze outside.
Once more, good people, let us in; we won't cause you any expense. You
see we bring our own food; only a little space at your fireside, a
little fire to cook it, and we will go hence satisfied.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

Do you think that we have any too much room, and that wood costs
nothing?


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

We have a little bundle of straw to make a fire with, we will be
satisfied with it; only give us leave to place the spit across your
fire-place.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

We will not do it; you arouse disgust, not pity, in us. It's my opinion
that you are drank, that you need nothing, and that you simply want to
get into our house to steal our fire and our daughters.


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

As you refuse to listen to any good reason, we propose to force our way
into your house.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

Try it, if you choose. We are so well protected that we need not fear
you. You are insolent knaves, too, and we won't answer you any more.


Thereupon, the hemp-beater closed the window-shutter with a great noise,
and went down to the lower room by a ladder. Then he took the bride by
the hand, the young people of both sexes joined them, and they all began
to dance and utter joyous exclamations, while the matrons sang in
piercing tones and indulged in loud peals of laughter in token of their
scorn and defiance of those who were attempting an assault without.

The besiegers, on their side, raged furiously together: they discharged
their pistols against the doors, made the dogs growl, pounded on the
walls, rattled the shutters, and uttered terror-inspiring yells; in
short, there was such an uproar that you could not hear yourself talk,
such a dust and smoke that you could not see yourself.

The attack was a mere pretence, however: the moment had not come to
violate the laws of etiquette. If they could succeed, by prowling about
the house, in finding an unguarded passage, any opening whatsoever, they
could try to gain an entrance by surprise, and then, if the bearer of
the spit succeeded in placing his bird in front of the fire, that
constituted a taking possession of the hearth-stone, the comedy was at
an end, and the bridegroom was victor.

But the entrances to the house were not so numerous that they were
likely to have neglected the usual precautions, and no one would have
assumed the right to employ violence before the moment fixed for the
conflict.

When they were weary of jumping about and shouting, the hemp-beater
meditated a capitulation. He went back to his window, opened it
cautiously, and hailed the discomfited besiegers with a roar of
laughter:

"Well, my boys," he said, "you're pretty sheepish, aren't you? You
thought that nothing could be easier than to break in here, and you
have discovered that our defences are strong. But we are beginning to
have pity on you, if you choose to submit and accept our conditions."


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

Speak, my good friends; tell us what we must do to be admitted to your
fireside.


THE HEMP-BEATER.

You must sing, my friends, but sing some song that we don't know, and
that we can't answer with a better one.

"Never you fear!" replied the grave-digger, and he sang in a powerful
voice:

"'_Tis six months since the spring-time_,"

"_When I walked upon the springing grass_," replied the hemp-beater, in
a somewhat hoarse but awe-inspiring voice. "Are you laughing at us, my
poor fellows, that you sing us such old trash? you see that we stop you
at the first word."

"_It was a prince's daughter_--"

"_And she would married be_" replied the hemp-beater. "Go on, go on to
another! we know that a little too well."


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

What do you say to this:

"_When from Nantes I was returning_--"


THE HEMP-BEATER.

"_I was weary, do you know! oh! so weary_." That's a song of my
grandmother's day. Give us another one.


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

"_The other day as I was walking_--"


THE HEMP-BEATER.

"_Along by yonder charming wood_!" That's a silly one! Our grandchildren
wouldn't take the trouble to answer you! What! are those all you know?


THE GRAVE-DIGGER.

Oh! we'll sing you so many of them, that you will end by stopping short.


Fully an hour was passed in this contest. As the two combatants were the
most learned men in the province in the matter of ballads, and as their
repertory seemed inexhaustible, it might well have lasted all night,
especially as the hemp-beater seemed to take malicious pleasure in
allowing his opponent to sing certain laments in ten, twenty, or thirty
stanzas, pretending by his silence to admit that he was defeated.
Thereupon, there was triumph in the bridegroom's camp, they sang in
chorus at the tops of their voices, and every one believed that the
adverse party would make default; but when the final stanza was half
finished, the old hemp-beater's harsh, hoarse voice would bellow out the
last words; whereupon he would shout: "You don't need to tire yourselves
out by singing such long ones, my children! We have them at our fingers'
ends!"

Once or twice, however, the hemp-beater made a wry face, drew his
eyebrows together, and turned with a disappointed air toward the
observant matrons. The grave-digger was singing something so old that
his adversary had forgotten it, or perhaps had never known it; but the
good dames instantly sang the victorious refrain through their noses, in
tones as shrill as those of the sea-gull; and the grave-digger, summoned
to surrender, passed to something else.

It would have been too long to wait until one side or the other won the
victory. The bride's party announced that they would show mercy on
condition that the others should offer her a gift worthy of her.

Thereupon, the song of the _livrées_ began, to an air as solemn as a
church chant.

The men outside sang in unison:

     "Ouvrez la porte, ouvrez,
     Marie, ma mignonne,
    _J'ons_ de beaux cadeaux à vous présenter.
    Hélas! ma mie, laissez-nous entrer."[3]

To which the women replied from the interior, in falsetto, in doleful
tones:

    "Mon père est en chagrin, ma mère en grand' tristesse,
    Et moi je suis fille de trop grand' merci
    Pour ouvrir ma porte à _cette heure ici_."[4]

The men repeated the first stanza down to the fourth line, which they
modified thus:

    "J'ons un beau mouchoir à vous présenter."[5]

But the women replied, in the name of the bride, in the same words as
before.

Through twenty stanzas, at least, the men enumerated all the gifts in
the _livrée_, always mentioning a new article in the last verse: a
beautiful _devanteau_,--apron,--lovely ribbons, a cloth dress, lace, a
gold cross, even to _a hundred pins_ to complete the bride's modest
outfit. The matrons invariably refused; but at last the young men
decided to mention _a handsome husband to offer_, and they replied by
addressing the bride, and singing to her with the men:

     "Ouvrez la porte, ouvrez,
     Marie, ma mignonne,
    C'est un beau man qui vient vous chercher.
    Allons, ma mie, laissons-les entrer."[6]




III

THE WEDDING


The hemp-beater at once drew the wooden latch by which the door was
fastened on the inside; at that time, it was still the only lock known
in most of the houses in our village. The bridegroom's party invaded the
bride's dwelling, but not without a combat; for the boys stationed
inside the house, and even the old hemp-beater and the old women, made
it their duty to defend the hearthstone. The bearer of the spit,
supported by his adherents, was bound to succeed in bestowing his bird
in the fire-place. It was a genuine battle, although they abstained from
striking one another, and there was no anger in it. But they pushed and
squeezed one another with such violence, and there was so much
self-esteem at stake in that conflict of muscular strength, that the
results might be more serious than they seemed to be amid the laughter
and the singing. The poor old hemp-beater, who fought like a lion, was
pressed against the wall and squeezed until he lost his breath. More
than one champion was floored and unintentionally trodden under foot,
more than one hand that grasped at the spit was covered with blood.
Those sports are dangerous, and the accidents were so serious in later
years that the peasants determined to allow the ceremony of the
_livrées_ to fall into desuetude. I believe that we saw the last of it
at Françoise Meillant's wedding, and still it was only a mock-battle.

The contest was animated enough at Germain's wedding. It was a point of
honor on one side and the other to attack and to defend La Guillette's
fireside. The huge spit was twisted like a screw in the powerful hands
that struggled for possession of it. A pistol-shot set fire to a small
store of hemp in skeins that lay on a shelf suspended from the ceiling.
That incident created a diversion, and while some hastened to smother
the germ of a conflagration, the grave-digger, who had climbed to the
attic unperceived, came down the chimney and seized the spit, just as
the drover, who was defending it near the hearth, raised it above his
head to prevent its being snatched from him. Some time before the
assault, the matrons had taken care to put out the fire, fearing that
some one might fall in and be burned while they were struggling close
beside it. The facetious grave-digger, in concert with the drover,
possessed himself of the trophy without difficulty, therefore, and threw
it across the fire-dogs. It was done! No one was allowed to touch it
after that. He leaped into the room, and lighted a bit of straw which
surrounded the spit, to make a pretence of cooking the goose, which was
torn to pieces and its limbs strewn over the floor.

Thereupon, there was much laughter and burlesque discussion. Every one
showed the bruises he had received, and as it was often the hand of a
friend that had dealt the blow, there was no complaining or quarrelling.
The hemp-beater, who was half flattened out, rubbed his sides, saying
that he cared very little for that, but that he did protest against the
stratagem of his good friend the grave-digger, and that, if he had not
been half-dead, the hearth would not have been conquered so easily. The
matrons swept the floor, and order was restored. The table was covered
with jugs of new wine. When they had drank together and recovered their
breath, the bridegroom was led into the centre of the room, and, being
armed with a staff, was obliged to submit to a new test.

During the contest, the bride had been concealed with three of her
friends by her mother, her godmother, and aunts, who had seated the four
girls on a bench in the farthest corner of the room, and covered them
over with a great white sheet. They had selected three of Marie's
friends who were of the same height as she, and wore caps of exactly the
same height, so that, as the sheet covered their heads and descended to
their feet, it was impossible to distinguish them from each other.

The bridegroom was not allowed to touch them, except with the end of his
wand, and only to point out the one whom he judged to be his wife. They
gave him time to examine them, but only with his eyes, and the matrons,
who stood by his side, watched closely to see that there was no
cheating. If he made a mistake, he could not dance with his betrothed
during the evening, but only with her whom he had chosen by mistake.

Germain, finding himself in the presence of those phantoms enveloped in
the same winding-sheet, was terribly afraid of making a mistake; and, as
a matter of fact, that had happened to many others, for the precautions
were always taken with scrupulous care. His heart beat fast. Little
Marie tried to breathe hard and make the sheet move, but her mischievous
rivals did the same, pushed out the cloth with their fingers, and there
were as many mysterious signs as there were girls under the veil. The
square caps kept the veil so perfectly level that it was impossible to
distinguish the shape of a head beneath its folds.

Germain, after ten minutes of hesitation, closed his eyes, commended his
soul to God, and stuck his staff out at random. He touched little
Marie's forehead, and she threw the sheet aside with a cry of triumph.
He obtained leave then to kiss her, and, taking her in his strong arms,
he carried her to the middle of the room, and with her opened the ball,
which lasted until two o'clock in the morning.

Then they separated to meet again at eight o'clock. As there was a
considerable number of young people from the neighboring towns, and as
there were not beds enough for everybody, each invited guest among the
women of the village shared her bed with two or three friends, while the
young men lay pell-mell on the hay in the loft at the farm. You can
imagine that there was not much sleep there, for they thought of nothing
but teasing, and playing tricks on one another and telling amusing
stories. At all weddings, there are three sleepless nights, which no one
regrets.

At the hour appointed for setting out, after they had eaten their soup
_au lait_ seasoned with a strong dose of pepper to give them an
appetite, for the wedding-banquet bade fair to be abundant, they
assembled in the farm-yard. Our parish church being suppressed, they
were obliged to go half a league away to receive the nuptial
benediction. It was a lovely, cool day; but, as the roads were very bad,
every man had provided himself with a horse, and took _en croupe_ a
female companion, young or old. Germain was mounted upon Grise, who,
being well groomed, newly shod, and decked out in ribbons, pranced and
capered and breathed fire through her nostrils. He went to the cabin for
his fiancée, accompanied by his brother-in-law Jacques, who was mounted
on old Grise and took Mère Guillette _en croupe_, while Germain returned
triumphantly to the farm-yard with his dear little wife.

Then the merry cavalcade set forth, escorted by children on foot, who
fired pistols as they ran and made the horses jump. Mère Maurice was
riding in a small cart with Germain's three children and the fiddlers.
They opened the march to the sound of the instruments. Petit-Pierre was
so handsome that the old grandmother was immensely proud. But the
impulsive child did not stay long beside her. He took advantage of a
halt they were obliged to make, when they had gone half the distance, in
order to pass a difficult ford, to slip down and ask his father to take
him up on Grise in front of him.

"No, no!" said Germain, "that will make people say unkind things about
us! you mustn't do it."

"I care very little what the people of Saint-Chartier say," said little
Marie. "Take him, Germain, I beg you; I shall be prouder of him than of
my wedding-dress."

Germain yielded the point, and the handsome trio dashed forward at
Grise's proudest gallop.

And, in fact, the people of Saint-Chartier, although very satirical and
a little inclined to be disagreeable in their intercourse with the
neighboring parishes which had been combined with theirs, did not think
of laughing when they saw such a handsome bridegroom and lovely bride,
and a child that a king's wife would have envied. Petit-Pierre had a
full coat of blue-bottle colored cloth, and a cunning little red
waistcoat so short that it hardly came below his chin. The village
tailor had made the sleeves so tight that he could not put his little
arms together. And how proud he was! He had a round hat with a black and
gold buckle and a peacock's feather protruding jauntily from a tuft of
Guinea-hen's feathers. A bunch of flowers larger than his head covered
his shoulder, and ribbons floated down to his feet. The hemp-beater, who
was also the village barber and wig-maker, had cut his hair in a circle,
covering his head with a bowl and cutting off all that protruded, an
infallible method of guiding the scissors accurately. Thus accoutred, he
was less picturesque, surely, than with his long hair flying in the wind
and his lamb's fleece _à la_ Saint John the Baptist; but he had no such
idea, and everybody admired him, saying that he looked like a little
man. His beauty triumphed over everything, and, in sooth, over what
would not the incomparable beauty of childhood triumph?

His little sister Solange had, for the first time in her life, a real
cap instead of the little child's cap of Indian muslin that little girls
wear up to the age of two or three years. And such a cap! higher and
broader than the poor little creature's whole body. And how lovely she
considered herself! She dared not turn her head, and sat perfectly
straight and stiff, thinking that people would take her for the bride.

As for little Sylvain, he was still in long dresses and lay asleep on
his grandmother's knees, with no very clear idea of what a wedding might
be.

Germain gazed affectionately at his children, and said to his fiancée,
as they arrived at the mayor's office:

"Do you know, Marie, I ride up to this door a little happier than I was
the day I brought you home from the woods of Chanteloube, thinking that
you would never love me; I took you in my arms to put you on the ground
just as I do now, but I didn't think we should ever be together again on
good Grise with this child on our knees. I love you so much, you see, I
love those dear little ones so much, I am so happy because you love me
and love them and because my people love you, and I love my mother and
my friends and everybody so much to-day, that I wish I had three or four
hearts to hold it all. Really, one is too small to hold so much love and
so much happiness! I have something like a pain in my stomach."

There was a crowd at the mayor's door and at the church to see the
pretty bride. Why should we not describe her costume? it became her so
well. Her cap of white embroidered muslin had flaps trimmed with lace.
In those days, peasant-women did not allow themselves to show a single
hair; and although their caps conceal magnificent masses of hair rolled
in bands of white thread to keep the head-dress in place, even in these
days it would be considered an immodest and shameful action to appear
before men bareheaded. They do allow themselves now, however, to wear a
narrow band across the forehead, which improves their appearance very
much. But I regret the classic head-dress of my time: the white lace
against the skin had a suggestion of old fashioned chastity which seemed
to me more solemn, and when a face was beautiful under those
circumstances, it was a beauty whose artless charm and majesty no words
can describe.

Little Marie still wore that head dress, and her forehead was so white
and so pure that it defied the white of the linen to cast a shadow upon
it. Although she had not closed her eyes during the night, the morning
air, and above all things the inward joy of a soul as spotless as the
sky, and a little hidden fire, held in check by the modesty of youth,
sent to her cheeks a flush as delicate as the peach-blossom in the early
days of April.

Her white fichu, chastely crossed over her bosom, showed only the
graceful contour of a neck as full and round as a turtle-dove's; her
morning dress of fine myrtle-green cloth marked the shape of her slender
waist, which seemed perfect, but was likely to grow and develop, for she
was only seventeen. She wore an apron of violet silk, with the pinafore
which our village women have made a great mistake in abolishing, and
which imparted so much modesty and refinement to the chest. To-day, they
spread out their fichus more proudly, but there is no longer that sweet
flower of old-fashioned pudicity in their costume that made them
resemble Holbein's virgins. They are more coquettish, more graceful. The
correct style in the old days was a sort of unbending stiffness which
made their infrequent smiles more profound and more ideal.

At the offertory, Germain, according to the usual custom, placed the
_treizain_--that is to say, thirteen pieces of silver--in his fiancée's
hand. He placed on her finger a silver ring of a shape that remained
invariable for centuries, but has since been replaced by the _band of
gold._ As they left the church, Marie whispered: "Is it the ring I
wanted? the one I asked you for, Germain?"

"Yes," he replied, "the one my Catherine had on her finger when she
died. The same ring for both my marriages."

"Thank you, Germain," said the young wife in a serious tone and with
deep feeling. "I shall die with it, and if I die before you, you must
keep it for your little Solange."




IV

THE CABBAGE


They remounted their horses, and rode rapidly back to Belair. The
banquet was a sumptuous affair, and lasted, intermingled with dancing
and singing, until midnight. The old people did not leave the table for
fourteen hours. The grave-digger did the cooking, and did it very well.
He was renowned for that, and he left his ovens to come and dance and
sing between every two courses. And yet he was epileptic, was poor Père
Bontemps. Who would have suspected it? He was as fresh and vigorous and
gay as a young man. One day we found him lying like a dead man in a
ditch, all distorted by his malady, just at nightfall. We carried him to
our house in a wheelbarrow, and passed the night taking care of him.
Three days later, he was at a wedding, singing like a thrush, leaping
like a kid, and frisking about in the old-fashioned way. On leaving a
marriage-feast, he would go and dig a grave and nail up a coffin. He
performed those duties devoutly, and although they seemed to have no
effect on his merry humor, he retained a melancholy impression which
hastened the return of his attacks. His wife, a paralytic, had not left
her chair for twenty years. His mother is a hundred and forty years old
and is still alive. But he, poor man, so jovial and kind-hearted and
amusing, was killed last year by falling from his loft to the pavement.
Doubtless he was suddenly attacked by his malady, and had hidden himself
in the hay, as he was accustomed to do, in order not to frighten and
distress his family. Thus ended, in a tragic way, a life as strange as
himself, a mixture of gloom and folly, of horror and hilarity, amid
which his heart remained always kind and his character lovable.

But we are coming to the third day of the wedding-feast, which is the
most interesting of all, and has been retained in full vigor down to our
own day. We will say nothing of the slice of toast that is carried to
the nuptial bed; that is an absurd custom which offends the modesty of
the bride, and tends to destroy that of the young girls who are present.
Moreover, I think that it is a custom which obtains in all the provinces
and has no peculiar features as practised among us.

[Illustration: Chapter IV (Appendix)

_He fell on his knees in the furrow through which he was about to run
his plough once more, and repeated the morning prayer with such emotion
that the tears rolled down his cheeks, still moist with perspiration_]

Just as the ceremony of the _livrées_ is the symbol of the taking
possession of the bride's heart and home, that of the _cabbage_ is the
symbol of the fruitfulness of the union. After breakfast on the day
following the marriage-ceremony, comes this strange performance, which
is of Gallic origin, but, as it passed through the hands of the
primitive Christians, gradually became a sort of _mystery_, or burlesque
morality-play of the Middle Ages.

Two youths--the merriest and most energetic of the party--disappear
during the breakfast, don their costumes, and return, escorted by the
musicians, dogs, children, and pistol-shots. They represent a couple of
beggars, husband and wife, covered with the vilest rags. The husband is
the dirtier of the two: it is vice that has degraded him; the woman is
unhappy simply and debased by her husband's evil ways.

They are called the _gardener_ and the _gardener's wife_, and claim to
be fitted to watch and cultivate the sacred cabbage. But the husband is
known by several appellations, all of which have a meaning. He is
called, indifferently, the _pailloux_,[7] because he wears a wig made of
straw or hemp, and, to hide his nakedness, which is ill protected by his
rags, he surrounds his legs and a part of his body with straw. He also
provides himself with a huge belly or a hump by stuffing straw or hay
under his blouse. The _peilloux_ because he is covered with _peille_
(rags). And, lastly, the _païen_ (heathen), which is the most
significant of all, because he is supposed, by his cynicism and his
debauched life, to represent in himself the antipodes of all the
Christian virtues.

He arrives with his face daubed with grease and wine lees, sometimes
swallowed up in a grotesque mask. A wretched, cracked earthen cup, or an
old wooden shoe, hanging by a string to his belt, he uses to ask alms in
the shape of wine. No one refuses him, and he pretends to drink, then
pours the wine on the ground by way of libation. At every step, he falls
and rolls in the mud; he pretends to be most disgustingly drunk. His
poor wife runs after him, picks him up, calls for help, tears out the
hempen hair that protrudes in stringy locks from beneath her soiled cap,
weeps over her husband's degradation, and reproaches him pathetically.

"You wretch!" she says, "see what your bad conduct has reduced us to!
It's no use for me to spin, to work for you, to mend your clothes! you
never stop tearing and soiling them. You have run through my little
property, our six children are in the gutter, we live in a stable with
the beasts; here we are reduced to asking alms, and you're so ugly, so
revolting, so despised, that soon they will toss bread to us as they do
to the dogs. Alas! my poor _mondes_ [people], take pity on us! take pity
on me! I don't deserve my fate, and no woman ever had a filthier, more
detestable husband. Help me to pick him up, or else the wagons will
crush him like an old broken bottle, and I shall be a widow, which would
kill me with grief, although everybody says it would be great good
fortune for me."

Such is the rôle of the gardener's wife and her constant lamentation
throughout the play. For it is a genuine, spontaneous, improvised
comedy, played in the open air, on the highways, among the fields,
seasoned by all the incidents that happen to occur; and in it everybody
takes a part, wedding-guests and outsiders, occupants of the houses and
passers-by, for three or four hours in the day, as we shall see. The
theme is always the same, but it is treated in an infinite variety of
ways, and therein we see the instinct of mimicry, the abundance of
grotesque ideas, the fluency, the quickness at repartee, and even the
natural eloquence of our peasants.

The part of the gardener's wife is ordinarily entrusted to a slender,
beardless man with a fresh complexion, who is able to give great
verisimilitude to the character he assumes and to represent burlesque
despair so naturally that the spectators may be amused and saddened at
the same time as by the genuine article. Such thin, beardless men are
not rare in our country districts, and, strangely enough, they are
sometimes the most remarkable for muscular strength.

After the wife's wretched plight is made evident, the younger
wedding-guests urge her to leave her sot of a husband and divert herself
with them. They offer her their arms and lead her away. Gradually she
yields, becomes animated, and runs about, now with one, now with
another, behaving in a scandalous way: a new moral lesson--the husband's
misconduct incites and causes misconduct on the part of his wife.

The _païen_ thereupon awakes from his drunken stupor; he looks about for
his companion, provides himself with a rope and a stick, and runs after
her. They lead him a long chase, they hide from him, they pass the woman
from one to another, they try to keep her amused, and to deceive her
jealous mate. His _friends_ try hard to intoxicate him. At last, he
overtakes his faithless spouse and attempts to beat her. The most
realistic, shrewdest touch in this parody of the miseries of conjugal
life, is that the jealous husband never attacks those who take his wife
away from him. He is very polite and prudent with them, he does not
choose to vent his wrath on any one but the guilty wife, because she is
supposed to be unable to resist him.

But just as he raises his stick and prepares his rope to bind the
culprit, all the men in the wedding-party interpose and throw themselves
between the two. _Don't strike her! never strike your wife_! is the
formula that is repeated to satiety in these scenes. They disarm the
husband, they force him to pardon his wife and embrace her, and soon he
pretends to love her more dearly than ever. He walks about arm-in-arm
with her, singing and dancing, until a fresh attack of intoxication
sends him headlong to the ground once more: and with that his wife's
lamentations recommence, her discouragement, her pretended misconduct,
the husband's jealousy, the intervention of the bystanders, and the
reconciliation. There is in all this an ingenuous, even commonplace,
lesson, which savors strongly of its origin in the Middle Ages, but
which always makes an impression, if not upon the bride and groom,--who
are too much in love and too sensible to-day to need it,--at all
events, upon the children and young girls and boys. The _païen_ so
terrifies and disgusts the girls, by running after them and pretending
to want to kiss them, that they fly from him with an emotion in which
there is nothing artificial. His besmeared face and his great
stick--perfectly harmless, by the way--makes the youngsters shriek with
fear. It is the comedy of manners in its most elementary but most
impressive state.

When this farce is well under way, they prepare to go in search of the
cabbage. They bring a hand-barrow, on which the _païen_ is placed, armed
with a spade, a rope, and a great basket. Four strong men carry him on
their shoulders. His wife follows him on foot, the _ancients_ come in a
group behind, with grave and pensive mien; then the wedding-party falls
in two by two, keeping time to the music. The pistol-shots begin again,
the dogs howl louder than ever at sight of the unclean _païen_, thus
borne in triumph. The children salute him derisively with wooden clogs
tied at the ends of strings.

But why this ovation to such a revolting personage? They are marching to
the conquest of the sacred cabbage, the emblem of matrimonial fecundity,
and this besotted drunkard is the only man who can put his hand upon
the symbolical plant. Therein, doubtless, is a mystery anterior to
Christianity, a mystery that reminds one of the festival of the
Saturnalia or some ancient Bacchanalian revel. Perhaps this _païen_, who
is at the same time the gardener _par excellence_, is nothing less than
Priapus in person, the god of gardens and debauchery,--a divinity
probably chaste and serious in his origin, however, like the mystery of
reproduction, but insensibly degraded by licentiousness of manners and
disordered ideas.

However that may be, the triumphal procession arrives at the bride's
house and marches into her garden. There they select the finest cabbage,
which is not quickly done, for the ancients hold a council and discuss
the matter at interminable length, each pleading for the cabbage which
seems to him the best adapted for the occasion. The question is put to a
vote, and when the choice is made, the _gardener_ fastens his rope
around the stalk and goes as far away as the size of the garden permits.
The gardener's wife looks out to see that the sacred vegetable is not
injured in its fall. The _Jesters_ of the wedding-party, the
hemp-beater, the grave-digger, the carpenter, or the cobbler,--in a
word, all those who do not work on the land, and who, as they pass
their lives in other people's houses, are reputed to have and do really
have more wit and a readier tongue than the simple agricultural
laborers,--take their places around the cabbage. One digs a trench with
the spade, so deep that you would say he was preparing to dig up an
oak-tree. Another puts on his nose a _drogue_, made of wood or
pasteboard, in imitation of a pair of spectacles: he performs the duties
of _engineer_, comes forward, walks away, prepares a plan, overlooks the
workmen, draws lines, plays the pedant, cries out that they are spoiling
the whole thing, orders the work to be abandoned and resumed according
to his fancy, and makes the performance as long and as absurd as he can.
Is this an addition to the former programme of the ceremony, in mockery
of theorists in general, for whom the ordinary peasant has the most
sovereign contempt, or in detestation of land-surveyors, who control the
register of lands and assess the taxes, or of the employees of the
Department of Roads and Bridges, who convert common lands into highways
and cause the suppression of time-worn abuses dear to the peasant heart?
Certain it is that this character in the comedy is called the
_geometrician_, and that he does his utmost to make himself unbearable
to those who handle the pick and shovel.

At last, after quarter of an hour of mummery and remonstrances, so that
the roots of the cabbage may not be cut and it can be transplanted
without injury, while spadefuls of earth are thrown into the faces of
the bystanders,--woe to him who does not step aside quickly enough;
though he were a bishop or a prince, he must receive the baptism of
earth,--the _païen_ pulls the rope, the _païenne_ holds her apron, and
the cabbage falls majestically amid the cheers of the spectators. Then
the basket is brought, and the pagan couple proceed to plant the cabbage
therein with all imaginable care and precautions. They pack it in fresh
soil, they prop it up with sticks and strings as city florists do their
superb potted camellias; they plant red apples stuck on twigs, branches
of thyme, sage, and laurel all about it; they deck the whole with
ribbons and streamers; they place the trophy on the hand-barrow with the
_paten_, who is expected to maintain its equilibrium and keep it from
accident, and at last they leave the garden in good order to the music
of a march.

But when they come to pass through the gate, and again when they try to
enter the bridegroom's yard, an imaginary obstacle bars the passage.
The bearers of the barrow stumble, utter loud exclamations, step back,
go forward again, and, as if they were driven back by an invisible
force, seem to succumb under the burden. Meanwhile, the rest of the
party laugh heartily and urge on and soothe the human team. "Softly!
softly, boy! Come, courage! Look out! Patience! Stoop! The gate is too
low! Close up, it's too narrow! a little to the left; now to the right!
Come, take heart, there you are!"

So it sometimes happens that, in years of abundant crops, the ox-cart,
laden beyond measure with fodder or grain, is too broad or too high to
enter the barndoor. And such exclamations are shouted at the powerful
cattle to restrain or excite them; and with skilful handling and
vigorous efforts the mountain of wealth is made to pass, without mishap,
beneath the rustic triumphal arch. Especially with the last load, called
the _gerbaude_, are these precautions required; for that is made the
occasion of a rustic festival, and the last sheaf gathered from the last
furrow is placed on top of the load, decorated with ribbons and flowers,
as are the heads of the oxen and the driver's goad. Thus the triumphal,
laborious entry of the cabbage into the house is an emblem of the
prosperity and fruitfulness it represents.

Arrived in the bridegroom's yard, the cabbage is taken to the highest
point of the house or the barn. If there is a chimney, a gable end, a
dove-cote higher than the other elevated portions, the burden must, at
any risk, be taken to that culminating point. The _païen_ accompanies it
thither, fixes it in place, and waters it from a huge jug of wine, while
a salvo of pistol-shots and the joyful contortions of the _païenne_
announce its inauguration.

The same ceremony is immediately repeated. Another cabbage is dug up in
the bridegroom's garden and borne with the same formalities to the roof
that his wife has abandoned to go with him. The trophies remain in place
until the rain and wind destroy the baskets and carry off the cabbages.
But they live long enough to offer some chance of fulfilment of the
prophecy that the old men and matrons utter as they salute them.
"Beautiful cabbage," they say, "live and flourish, so that our young
bride may have a fine little baby before the end of the year; for if you
die too quickly, it will be a sign of sterility, and you will be stuck
up there on top of the house like an evil omen."

The day is far advanced before all these performances are at an end. It
only remains to escort the husband and wife to the godfathers and
godmothers. When these putative parents live at a distance, they are
escorted by the musicians and all the wedding-party to the limits of the
parish. There, there is more dancing by the roadside, and they kiss the
bride and groom when they take leave of them. The _païen_ and his wife
are then washed and dressed in clean clothes, when they are not so
fatigued by their rôles that they have had to take a nap.

They were still dancing and singing and eating at the farm-house at
Belair at midnight on the third day of the festivities attending
Germain's wedding. The old men were seated at the table, unable to leave
it, and for good reason. They did not recover their legs and their wits
until the next day at dawn. At that time, while they sought their homes,
in silence and with uncertain steps, Germain, proud and well-content,
went out to yoke his cattle, leaving his young wife to sleep until
sunrise. The lark, singing as he flew upward to the sky, seemed to him
to be the voice of his heart, giving thanks to Providence. The
hoar-frost, glistening on the bare bushes, seemed to him the white April
blossoms that precede the appearance of the leaves. All nature was
serene and smiling in his eyes. Little Pierre had laughed and jumped
about so much the day before, that he did not come to help him to drive
his oxen; but Germain was content to be alone. He fell on his knees in
the furrow through which he was about to run his plough once more, and
repeated the morning prayer with such emotion that the tears rolled down
his cheeks, still moist with perspiration.

In the distance could be heard the songs of the youths from the
adjoining parishes, just starting for home, and repeating, in voices
somewhat the worse for wear, the merry refrains of the preceding night.




NOTES


[Footnote 1:

    By the sweat of thy brow
    Thou wilt earn thy poor livelihood;
    After long travail and service,
    Lo! _Death_ comes and calls thee.
]

[Footnote 2: The name applied to the road which turns aside from the
main street at the entrance to a village and runs along its outskirts.
It is supposed that people who fear that they may receive some merited
_affront_ will take that road to avoid being seen.--_Author's Note_.]

[Footnote 3:

     Open the door, yes, open,
     Marie, my darling,
    I have beautiful gifts to offer you.
    Alas! my dear, pray let us in.
]

[Footnote 4:

    My father grieves, my mother's deathly sad,
    And I am too pitiful a daughter
    To open my door at such an hour.
]

[Footnote 5:

    I have a fine handkerchief to offer you.
]

[Footnote 6:

     Open the door, yes, open,
     Marie, my darling,
    'Tis a handsome husband who comes to seek you.
    Come, my dear, and let us let them in.
]

[Footnote 7: Man of straw--from _paille_ (straw).]




List of Illustrations

THE DEVIL'S POOL


LITTLE MARIE TENDING HER SHEEP

PIERRE'S STRATAGEM

PIERRE'S EVENING PRAYER

THE FARMER BROUGHT TO ACCOUNT

GERMAIN REPEATS HIS MATIN PRAYER





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Devil's Pool, by George Sand

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEVIL'S POOL ***

***** This file should be named 12816-8.txt or 12816-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/8/1/12816/

Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Wilelmina Mallière and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mauprat, by George Sand

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mauprat

Author: George Sand

Translator: Stanley Young

Release Date: March 25, 2006 [EBook #2194]
Last Updated: November 19, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAUPRAT ***




Produced by Dagny; and John Bickers





MAUPRAT

by George Sand


Translated by Stanley Young



CONTENTS

George Sand Pearl Mary-Teresa Craigie (John Oliver Hobbes)

Life of George Sand Edmund Gosse

The Author’s Preface

Mauprat




GEORGE SAND

Napoleon in exile declared that were he again on the throne he should
make a point of spending two hours a day in conversation with women,
from whom there was much to be learnt. He had, no doubt, several types
of women in mind, but it is more than probable that the banishment of
Madame de Stael rose before him as one of the mistakes in his career. It
was not that he showed lack of judgment merely by the persecution of a
rare talent, but by failing to see that the rare talent was pointing out
truths very valuable to his own safety. This is what happened in France
when George Sand--the greatest woman writer the world has known, or is
ever likely to know--was attacked by the orthodox critics of her time.
They feared her warnings; they detested her sincerity--a sincerity
displayed as much in her life as in her works (the hypocrite’s Paradise
was precisely her idea of Hell); they resented bitterly an independence
of spirit which in a man would have been in the highest degree
distinguished, which remained, under every test, untamable. With a kind
of _bonhomie_ which one can only compare with Fielding’s, with a passion
as great as Montaigne’s for acknowledging the truths of experience,
with an absence of self-consciousness truly amazing in the artistic
temperament of either sex, she wrote exactly as she thought, saw and
felt. Humour was not her strong point. She had an exultant joy in
living, but laughter, whether genial or sardonic, is not in her work.
Irony she seldom, if ever, employed; satire she never attempted. It was
on the maternal, the sympathetic side that her femininity, and therefore
her creative genius, was most strongly developed. She was masculine only
in the deliberate libertinism of certain episodes in her own life. This
was a characteristic--one on no account to be overlooked or denied or
disguised, but it was not her character. The character was womanly,
tender, exquisitely patient and good-natured. She would take cross
humanity in her arms, and carry it out into the sunshine of the fields;
she would show it flowers and birds, sing songs to it, tell it stories,
recall its original beauty. Even in her moods of depression and revolt,
one recognises the fatigue of the strong. It is never for a moment the
lassitude of the feeble, the weary spite of a sick and ill-used soul. As
she was free from personal vanity, she was also free from hysteria. On
marriage--the one subject which drove her to a certain though always
disciplined violence--she clearly felt more for others than they
felt for themselves; and in observing certain households and life
partnerships, she may have been afflicted with a dismay which the
unreflecting sufferers did not share. No writer who was carried away
by egoistic anger or disappointment could have told these stories of
unhappiness, infidelity, and luckless love with such dispassionate
lucidity.

With the artist’s dislike of all that is positive and arbitrary, she
was, nevertheless, subject rather to her intellect than her emotions.
An insult to her intelligence was the one thing she found it hard
to pardon, and she allowed no external interference to disturb her
relations with her own reasoning faculty. She followed caprices, no
doubt, but she was never under any apprehension with regard to their
true nature, displaying in this respect a detachment which is usually
considered exclusively virile. _Elle et Lui_, which, perhaps because
it is short and associated with actual facts, is the most frequently
discussed in general conversation on her work, remains probably the
sanest account of a sentimental experiment which was ever written. How
far it may have seemed accurate to De Musset is not to the point.
Her version of her grievance is at least convincing. Without fear and
without hope, she makes her statement, and it stands, therefore, unique
of its kind among indictments. It has been said that her fault was an
excess of emotionalism; that is to say, she attached too much importance
to mere feeling and described it, in French of marvellous ease and
beauty, with a good deal of something else which one can almost condemn
as the high-flown. Not that the high-flown is of necessity unnatural,
but it is misleading; it places the passing mood, the lyrical note,
dependent on so many accidents, above the essential temperament and the
dominant chord which depend on life only. Where she falls short of the
very greatest masters is in this all but deliberate confusion of things
which must change or can be changed with things which are unchangeable,
incurable, and permanent. Shakespeare, it is true, makes all his
villains talk poetry, but it is the poetry which a villain, were he a
poet, would inevitably write. George Sand glorifies every mind with her
own peculiar fire and tears. The fire is, fortunately, so much stronger
than the tears that her passion never degenerates into the maudlin. All
the same, she makes too universal a use of her own strongest gifts,
and this is why she cannot be said to excel as a portrait painter. One
merit, however, is certain: if her earliest writings were dangerous,
it was because of her wonderful power of idealization, not because she
filled her pages with the revolting and epicene sensuality of the new
Italian, French, and English schools. Intellectual viciousness was
not her failing, and she never made the modern mistake of confusing
indecency with vigour. She loved nature, air, and light too well and
too truly to go very far wrong in her imaginations. It may indeed be
impossible for many of us to accept all her social and political views;
they have no bearing, fortunately, on the quality of her literary art;
they have to be considered under a different aspect. In politics, her
judgment, as displayed in the letters to Mazzini, was profound. Her
correspondence with Flaubert shows us a capacity for stanch, unblemished
friendship unequalled, probably, in the biographies, whether published
or unpublished, of the remarkable.

With regard to her impiety--for such it should be called--it did not
arise from arrogance, nor was it based in any way upon the higher
learning of her period. Simply she did not possess the religious
instinct. She understood it sympathetically--in _Spiridion_, for
instance, she describes an ascetic nature as it has never been done in
any other work of fiction. Newman himself has not written passages of
deeper or purer mysticism, of more sincere spirituality. Balzac, in
_Seraphita_, attempted something of the kind, but the result was never
more than a _tour de force_. He could invent, he could describe, but
George Sand felt; and as she felt, she composed, living with and
loving with an understanding love all her creations. But it has to be
remembered always that she repudiated all religious restraint, that she
believed in the human heart, that she acknowledged no higher law than
its own impulses, that she saw love where others see only a cruel
struggle for existence, that she found beauty where ordinary visions can
detect little besides a selfishness worse than brutal and a squalor more
pitiful than death. Everywhere she insists upon the purifying influence
of affection, no matter how degraded in its circumstances or how illegal
in its manifestation. No writer--not excepting the Brontes--has shown
a deeper sympathy with uncommon temperaments, misunderstood aims,
consciences with flickering lights, the discontented, the abnormal, or
the unhappy. The great modern specialist for nervous diseases has not
improved on her analysis of the neuropathic and hysterical. There is
scarcely a novel of hers in which some character does not appear who
is, in the usual phrase, out of the common run. Yet, with this perfect
understanding of the exceptional case, she never permits any science of
cause and effect to obscure the rules and principles which in the main
control life for the majority. It was, no doubt, this balance which made
her a popular writer, even while she never ceased to keep in touch with
the most acute minds of France.

She possessed, in addition to creative genius of an order especially
individual and charming, a capacity for the invention of ideas. There
are in many of her chapters more ideas, more suggestions than one
would find in a whole volume of Flaubert. It is not possible that these
surprising, admirable, and usually sound thoughts were the result of
long hours of reflection. They belonged to her nature and a quality of
judgment which, even in her most extravagant romances, is never for a
moment swayed from that sane impartiality described by the unobservant
as common sense.

Her fairness to women was not the least astounding of her gifts. She is
kind to the beautiful, the yielding, above all to the very young, and in
none of her stories has she introduced any violently disagreeable female
characters. Her villains are mostly men, and even these she invests
with a picturesque fatality which drives them to errors, crimes,
and scoundrelism with a certain plaintive, if relentless, grace. The
inconstant lover is invariably pursued by the furies of remorse; the
brutal has always some mitigating influence in his career; the libertine
retains through many vicissitudes a seraphic love for some faithful
Solveig.

Humanity meant far more to her than art: she began her literary career
by describing facts as she knew them: critics drove her to examine their
causes, and so she gradually changed from the chronicler with strong
sympathies to the interpreter with a reasoned philosophy. She discovered
that a great deal of the suffering in this world is due not so much to
original sin, but to a kind of original stupidity, an unimaginative,
stubborn stupidity. People were dishonest because they believed,
wrongly, that dishonesty was somehow successful. They were cruel because
they supposed that repulsive exhibitions of power inspired a prolonged
fear. They were treacherous because they had never been taught the
greater strength of candour. George Sand tried to point out the
advantage of plain dealing, and the natural goodness of mankind
when uncorrupted by a false education. She loved the wayward and
the desolate: pretentiousness in any disguise was the one thing she
suspected and could not tolerate. It may be questioned whether she ever
deceived herself; but it must be said, that on the whole she flattered
weakness--and excused, by enchanting eloquence, much which cannot always
be justified merely on the ground that it is explicable. But to explain
was something--all but everything at the time of her appearance in
literature. Every novel she wrote made for charity--for a better
acquaintance with our neighbour’s woes and our own egoism. Such an
attitude of mind is only possible to an absolutely frank, even Arcadian,
nature. She did what she wished to do: she said what she had to say, not
because she wanted to provoke excitement or astonish the multitude, but
because she had succeeded eminently in leading her own life according to
her own lights. The terror of appearing inconsistent excited her scorn.
Appearances never troubled that unashamed soul. This is the magic, the
peculiar fascination of her books. We find ourselves in the presence
of a freshness, a primeval vigour which produces actually the effect of
seeing new scenes, of facing a fresh climate. Her love of the soil,
of flowers, and the sky, for whatever was young and unspoilt, seems
to animate every page--even in her passages of rhetorical sentiment we
never suspect the burning pastille, the gauze tea-gown, or the depressed
pink light. Rhetoric it may be, but it is the rhetoric of the sea and
the wheat field. It can be spoken in the open air and read by the light
of day.

George Sand never confined herself to any especial manner in her
literary work. Her spontaneity of feeling and the actual fecundity, as
it were, of her imaginative gift, could not be restrained, concentrated,
and formally arranged as it was in the case of the two first masters of
modern French novel-writing. Her work in this respect may be compared to
a gold mine, while theirs is rather the goldsmith’s craft. It must not
be supposed, however, that she was a writer without very strong views
with regard to the construction of a plot and the development of
character. Her literary essays and reviews show a knowledge of technique
which could be accepted at any time as a text-book for the critics and
the criticised. She knew exactly how artistic effects were obtained, how
and why certain things were done, why realism, so-called, could never be
anything but caricature, and why over-elaboration of small matters can
never be otherwise than disproportionate. Nothing could be more just
than her saying about Balzac that he was such a logician that he
invented things more truthful than the truth itself. No one knew better
than she that the truth, as it is commonly understood, does not exist;
that it cannot be logical because of its mystery; and that it is
the knowledge of its contradictions which shows the real expert in
psychology.

Three of her stories--_La Petite Fadette_, _La Mare au Diable_, and
_Les Maitres Mosaistes_--are as neat in their workmanship as a Dutch
painting. Her brilliant powers of analysis, the intellectual atmosphere
with which she surrounds the more complex characters in her longer
romances, are entirely put aside, and we are given instead a series
of pictures and dialogues in what has been called the purely objective
style; so pure in its objectivity and detachment that it would be hard
for any one to decide from internal evidence that they were in reality
her own composition.

To those who seek for proportion and form there is, without doubt, much
that is unsymmetrical in her designs. Interesting she always is, but to
the trained eye scenes of minor importance are, strictly speaking, too
long: descriptions in musical language sometimes distract the reader
from the progress of the story. But this arose from her own joy in
writing: much as she valued proportion, she liked expressing her mind
better, not out of conceit or self-importance, but as the birds, whom
she loved so well, sing.

Good nature is what we need above all in reading George Sand. It is
there--infectious enough in her own pages, and with it the courage which
can come only from a heart at peace with itself. This is why neither
fashion nor new nor old criticism can affect the title of George Sand
among the greatest influences of the last century and the present one.
Much that she has said still seems untried and unexpected. Writers so
opposite as Ibsen and Anatole France have expanded her themes. She is
quoted unconsciously to-day by hundreds who are ignorant of their real
source of inspiration. No woman ever wrote with such force before, and
no woman since has even approached her supreme accomplishments.

PEARL MARY-TERESA CRAIGIE.




LIFE OF GEORGE SAND

George Sand, in whose life nothing was commonplace, was born in Paris,
“in the midst of roses, to the sound of music,” at a dance which her
mother had somewhat rashly attended, on the 5th of July, 1804. Her
maiden name was Armentine Lucile Aurore Dupin, and her ancestry was of
a romantic character. She was, in fact, of royal blood, being the
great-grand-daughter of the Marshal Maurice du Saxe and a Mlle.
Verriere; her grandfather was M. Dupin de Francueil, the charming friend
of Rousseau and Mme. d’Epinay; her father, Maurice Dupin, was a gay and
brilliant soldier, who married the pretty daughter of a bird-fancier,
and died early. She was a child of the people on her mother’s side, an
aristocrat on her father’s. In 1807 she was taken by her father, who was
on Murat’s staff, into Spain, from which she returned to the house of
her grandmother, at Nohant in Berry. This old lady adopted Aurore at the
death of her father, in 1808. Of her childhood George Sand has given a
most picturesque account in her “Histoire de ma Vie.” In 1817 the girl
was sent to the Convent of the English Augustinians in Paris, where she
passed through a state of religious mysticism. She returned to Nohant
in 1820, and soon threw off her pietism in the outdoor exercises of a
wholesome country life. Within a few months, Mme. Dupin de Francueil
died at a great age, and Aurore was tempted to return to Paris. Her
relatives, however, were anxious that she should not do this, and
they introduced to her the natural son of a retired colonel, the Baron
Dudevant, whom, in September, 1822, she married. She brought him to live
with her at Nohant, and she bore him two sons, Maurice and Solange,
and a daughter. She quickly perceived, as her own intellectual nature
developed, that her boorish husband was unsuited to her, but their early
years of married life were not absolutely intolerable. In 1831, however,
she could endure him no longer, and an amicable separation was agreed
upon. She left M. Dudevant at Nohant, resigning her fortune, and
proceeded to Paris, where she was hard pressed to find a living. She
endeavoured, without success, to paint the lids of cigar-boxes, and in
final desperation, under the influence of Jules Sandeau--who became her
lover, and who invented the pseudonym of George Sand for her--she turned
her attention to literature. Her earliest work was to help Sandeau in
the composition of his novel, “Rose et Blanche” Her first independent
novel, “Indiana,” appeared at the close of 1831, and her second,
“Valentine,” two months later. These books produced a great and
immediate sensation, and she felt that she had found her vocation.
In 1833 she produced “Lebia”; in 1834 the “Lettres d’un Voyageur” and
“Jacques”; in 1835 “Andre” and “Leone Leoni.” After this her works
become too numerous and were produced with too monotonous a regularity
to be chronicled here. But it should be said that “Mauprat” was written
in 1836 at Nohant, while she was pleading for a legal separation from
her husband, which was given her by the tribunal of Bourges, with full
authority over the education of her children. These early novels all
reflect in measure the personal sorrows of the author, although
George Sand never ceased to protest against too strict a biographical
interpretation of their incidents. “Spiridion” (1839), composed under
the influence of Lamennais, deals with questions of free thought in
religion. But the novels of the first period of her literary activity,
which came to a close in 1840, are mainly occupied with a lyrical
individualism, and are inspired by the wrongs and disillusions of the
author’s personal adventures.

The years 1833 and 1834 were marked by her too-celebrated relations with
Alfred de Musset, with whom she lived in Paris and at Venice, and with
whom she quarrelled at last in circumstances deplorably infelicitous.
Neither of these great creatures had the reticence to exclude the world
from a narrative of their misfortunes and adventures; of the two it was
fairly certainly the woman who came the less injured out of the furnace.
In “Elle et Lui” (1859) she gave long afterward her version of the
unhappy and undignified story. Her stay in Venice appears to have
impressed her genius more deeply than any other section of her numerous
foreign sojournings.

The writings of George Sand’s second period, which extended from 1840
to 1848, are of a more general character, and are tinged with a generous
but not very enlightened ardour for social emancipation. Of these
novels, the earliest is “Le Compagnon du Tour de France” (1840), which
is scarcely a masterpiece. In the pursuit of foreign modes of thought,
and impelled by experiences of travel, George Sand rose to far greater
heights in “Jeanne” (1842), in “Consuelo” (1842-’43), and in “La
Comtesse de Rudolstade” (1844). All these books were composed in her
retirement at Nohant, where she definitely settled in 1839, after
having travelled for several months in Switzerland with Liszt and Mme.
d’Agoult, and having lived in the island of Majorca for some time
with the dying Chopin, an episode which is enshrined in her “Lucrezia
Floriani” (1847).

The Revolution of 1848 appeared to George Sand a realization of her
Utopian dreams, and plunged her thoughts into a painful disorder. She
soon, however, became dissatisfied with the result of her republican
theories, and she turned to two new sources of success, the country
story and the stage. Her delicious romance of “Francois le Champi”
 (1850) attracted a new and enthusiastic audience to her, and her entire
emancipation from “problems” was marked in the pages of “La Petite
Fadette” and of “La Mare au Diable.” To the same period belong “Les
Visions de la Nuit des les Campagnes,” “Les Maitres Sonneurs,” and
“Cosina.” From 1850 to 1864 she gave a great deal of attention to
the theatre, and of her numerous pieces several enjoyed a wide and
considerable success, although it cannot be said that any of her plays
have possessed the vitality of her best novels. The most solid of the
former was her dramatization of her story, “Le Marquis de Villemer”
 (1864), which was one of the latest, and next to it “Le Mariage de
Victorine” (1851), which was one of the earliest. Her successes on the
stage, such as they are, appear mainly due to collaboration with others.

In her latest period, from 1860 to 1876, George Sand returned to
her first lyrical manner, although with more reticence and a wider
experience of life. Of the very abundant fruitage of these last years,
not many rank with the masterpieces of her earlier periods, although
such novels as “Tamaris” (1862), “La Confession d’une Jeune Fille”
 (1865), and “Cadio,” seemed to her admirers to show no decline of force
or fire. Still finer, perhaps, were “Le Marquis de Villemer” (1861) and
“Jean de la Roche” (1860). Her latest production, which appeared after
her death, was the “Contes d’une Grand’mere,” a collection full of
humanity and beauty. George Sand died at Nohant on the 8th of June,
1876. She had great qualities of soul, and in spite of the naive
irregularities of her conduct in early middle life, she cannot
be regarded otherwise than as an excellent woman. She was brave,
courageous, heroically industrious, a loyal friend, a tender and wise
mother. Her principle fault has been wittily defined by Mr. Henry James,
who has remarked that in affairs of the heart George Sand never “behaved
like a gentleman.”

E. G.




PREFACE

When I wrote my novel _Mauprat_ at Nohant--in 1846, if I remember
rightly--I had just been suing for a separation. Hitherto I had written
much against the abuses of marriage, and perhaps, though insufficiently
explaining my views, had induced a belief that I failed to appreciate
its essence; but it was at this time that marriage itself stood before
me in all the moral beauty of its principle.

Misfortune is not without its uses to the thoughtful mind. The more
clearly I had realized the pain and pity of having to break a sacred
bond, the more profoundly I felt that where marriage is wanting, is
in certain elements of happiness and justice of too lofty a nature to
appeal to our actual society. Nay, more; society strives to take from
the sanctity of the institution by treating it as a contract of material
interests, attacking it on all sides at once, by the spirit of its
manners, by its prejudices, by its hypocritical incredulity.

While writing a novel as an occupation and distraction for my mind, I
conceived the idea of portraying an exclusive and undying love, before,
during, and after marriage. Thus I drew the hero of my book proclaiming,
at the age of eighty, his fidelity to the one woman he had ever loved.

The ideal of love is assuredly eternal fidelity. Moral and religious
laws have aimed at consecrating this ideal. Material facts obscure it.
Civil laws are so framed as to make it impossible or illusory. Here,
however, is not the place to prove this. Nor has _Mauprat_ been burdened
with a proof of the theory; only, the sentiment by which I was specially
penetrated at the time of writing it is embodied in the words of
_Mauprat_ towards the end of the book: “She was the only woman I loved
in all my life; none other ever won a glance from me, or knew the
pressure of my hand.”

GEORGE SAND.

June 5, 1857.



TO

GUSTAVE PAPET

Though fashion may proscribe the patriarchal fashion of dedications, I
would ask you, brother and friend, to accept this of a tale which is not
new to you. I have drawn my materials in part from the cottages of our
Noire valley. May we live and die there, repeating every evening our
beloved invocation:

SANCTA SIMPLICITAS!

GEORGE SAND.





MAUPRAT


On the borders of La Marche and Berry, in the district known as
Varenne, which is naught but a vast moor studded with forests of oak
and chestnut, and in the most thickly wooded and wildest part of the
country, may be found, crouching within a ravine, a little ruined
chateau. The dilapidated turrets would not catch your eye until you were
about a hundred yards from the principal portcullis. The venerable trees
around and the scattered rocks above, bury it in everlasting obscurity;
and you would experience the greatest difficulty, even in broad
daylight, in crossing the deserted path leading to it, without stumbling
against the gnarled trunks and rubbish that bar every step. The name
given to this dark ravine and gloomy castle is Roche-Mauprat.

It was not so long ago that the last of the Mauprats, the heir to this
property, had the roofing taken away and all the woodwork sold. Then,
as if to give a kick to the memory of his ancestors, he ordered the
entrance gate to be thrown down, the north tower to be gutted, and a
breach to be made in the surrounding wall. This done, he departed with
his workmen, shaking the dust from off his feet, and abandoning his
domain to foxes, and cormorants, and vipers. Since then, whenever the
wood-cutters and charcoal-burners from the huts in the neighbourhood
pass along the top of the Roche-Mauprat ravine, if it is in daytime they
whistle with a defiant air or hurl a hearty curse at the ruins; but
when day falls and the goat-sucker begins to screech from the top of
the loopholes, wood-cutter and charcoal-burner pass by silently, with
quickened step, and cross themselves from time to time to ward off the
evil spirits that hold sway among the ruins.

For myself, I own that I have never skirted the ravine at night without
feeling a certain uneasiness; and I would not like to swear that on some
stormy nights I have not given my horse a touch of the spur, in order
to escape the more quickly from the disagreeable impression this
neighbourhood made on me.

The reason is that in childhood I classed the name of Mauprat with those
of Cartouche and Bluebeard; and in the course of horrible dreams I often
used to mix up the ancient legends of the Ogre and the Bogey with the
quite recent events which in our province had given such a sinister
lustre to this Mauprat family.

Frequently, out shooting, when my companions and I have left our posts
to go and warm ourselves at the charcoal fires which the workmen keep
up all night, I have heard this name dying away on their lips at our
approach. But when they had recognised us and thoroughly satisfied
themselves that the ghosts of none of these robbers were hiding in our
midst, they would tell us in a whisper such stories as might make one’s
hair stand on end, stories which I shall take good care not to pass on
to you, grieved as I am that they should ever have darkened and pained
my own memory.

Not that the story I am about to tell is altogether pleasant and
cheerful. On the contrary, I must ask your pardon for unfolding so
sombre a tale. Yet, in the impression which it has made on myself there
is something so consoling and, if I may venture the phrase, so healthful
to the soul, that you will excuse me, I hope, for the sake of the
result. Besides this is a story which has just been told to me. And now
you ask me for one. The opportunity is too good to be missed for one of
my laziness or lack of invention.

It was only last week that I met Bernard Mauprat, the last of the
line, the man who, having long before severed himself from his infamous
connections, determined to demolish his manor as a sign of the horror
aroused in him by the recollections of childhood. This Bernard is one of
the most respected men in the province. He lives in a pretty house near
Chateauroux, in a flat country. Finding myself in the neighbourhood,
with a friend of mine who knows him, I expressed a wish to be
introduced; and my friend, promising me a hearty welcome, took me to his
house then and there.

I already knew in outline the remarkable history of this old man; but I
had always felt a keen desire to fill in the details, and above all to
receive them from himself. For me, the strange destiny of the man was
a philosophical problem to be solved. I therefore noticed his features,
his manners, and his home with peculiar interest.

Bernard Mauprat must be fully eighty-four, though his robust health, his
upright figure, his firm step, and the absence of any infirmity might
indicate some fifteen or twenty years less. His face would have appeared
to me extremely handsome, had not a certain harshness of expression
brought before my eyes, in spite of myself, the shades of his fathers.
I very much fear that, externally at all events, he must resemble them.
This he alone could have told us; for neither my friend nor myself had
known any other Mauprat. Naturally, however, we were very careful not to
inquire.

It struck us that his servants waited on him with a promptitude and
punctuality quite marvellous in Berrichon domestics. Nevertheless, at
the least semblance of delay he raised his voice, knitted his eyebrows
(which still showed very black under his white hair), and muttered a few
expressions of impatience which lent wings even to the slowest. At first
I was somewhat shocked at this habit; it appeared to savour rather too
strongly of the Mauprats. But the kindly and almost paternal manner in
which he spoke to them a moment later, and their zeal, which seemed so
distinct from fear, soon reconciled me to him. Towards us, moreover, he
showed an exquisite politeness, and expressed himself in the choicest
terms. Unfortunately, at the end of dinner, a door which had been left
open and through which a cold air found its way to his venerable skull,
drew from him such a frightful oath that my friend and I exchanged a
look of surprise. He noticed it.

“I beg your pardon, gentlemen,” he said. “I am afraid you find me an odd
mixture. Ah, you see but a short distance. I am an old branch, happily
torn from a vile trunk and transplanted into good soil, but still
knotted and rough like the wild holly of the original stock. I have,
believe me, had no little trouble in reaching the state of comparative
gentleness and calm in which you behold me. Alas! if I dared, I should
reproach Providence with a great injustice--that of having allotted me
a life as short as other men’s. When one has to struggle for forty or
fifty years to transform one’s self from a wolf into a man, one ought to
live a hundred years longer to enjoy one’s victory. Yet what good
would that do me?” he added in a tone of sadness. “The kind fairy who
transformed me is here no more to take pleasure in her work. Bah! it is
quite time to have done with it all.”

Then he turned towards me, and, looking at me with big dark eyes, still
strangely animated, said:

“Come, my dear young man; I know what brings you to see me; you are
curious to hear my history. Draw nearer the fire, then. Mauprat though
I am, I will not make you do duty for a log. In listening you are giving
me the greatest pleasure you could give. Your friend will tell you,
however, that I do not willingly talk of myself. I am generally afraid
of having to deal with blockheads, but you I have already heard of;
I know your character and your profession; you are an observer and
narrator--in other words, pardon me, inquisitive and a chatterbox.”

He began to laugh, and I made an effort to laugh too, though with
a rising suspicion that he was making game of us. Nor could I help
thinking of the nasty tricks that his grandfather took a delight in
playing on the imprudent busybodies who called upon him. But he put his
arm through mine in a friendly way, and making me sit down in front of a
good fire, near a table covered with cups--

“Don’t be annoyed,” he said. “At my age I cannot get rid of hereditary
sarcasm; but there is nothing spiteful in mine. To speak seriously, I am
delighted to see you and to confide in you the story of my life. A man
as unfortunate as I have been deserves to find a faithful biographer to
clear his memory from all stain. Listen, then, and take some coffee.”

I offered him a cup in silence. He refused it with a wave of the arm
and a smile which seemed to say, “That is rather for your effeminate
generation.”

Then he began his narrative in these words:




I

You live not very far from Roche-Mauprat, and must have often passed by
the ruins. Thus there is no need for me to describe them. All I can tell
you is that the place has never been so attractive as it is now. On the
day that I had the roof taken off, the sun for the first time brightened
the damp walls within which my childhood was passed; and the lizards
to which I have left them are much better housed there than I once was.
They can at least behold the light of day and warm their cold limbs in
the rays of the sun at noon.

There used to be an elder and a younger branch of the Mauprats. I belong
to the elder. My grandfather was that old Tristan de Mauprat who ran
through his fortune, dishonoured his name, and was such a blackguard
that his memory is already surrounded by a halo of the marvelous. The
peasants still believe that his ghost appears, either in the body of a
wizard who shows malefactors the way to the dwellings of Varenne, or in
that of an old white hare which reveals itself to people meditating
some evil deed. When I came into the world the only living member of the
younger branch was Monsieur Hubert de Mauprat, known as the chevalier,
because he belonged to the Order of the Knights of Malta; a man just as
good as his cousin was bad. Being the youngest son of his family, he had
taken the vow of celibacy; but, when he found himself the sole survivor
of several brothers and sisters, he obtained release from his vow, and
took a wife the year before I was born. Rumour says that before changing
his existence in this way he made strenuous efforts to find some
descendant of the elder branch worthy to restore the tarnished family
name, and preserve the fortune which had accumulated in the hands of the
younger branch. He had endeavoured to put his cousin Tristan’s affairs
in order, and had frequently paid off the latter’s creditors. Seeing,
however, that the only effect of his kindness was to encourage the vices
of the family, and that, instead of respect and gratitude, he received
nothing but secret hatred and churlish jealousy, he abandoned all
attempts at friendship, broke with his cousins, and in spite of his
advanced age (he was over sixty), took a wife in order to have heirs of
his own. He had one daughter, and there his hopes of posterity ended;
for soon afterward his wife died of a violent illness which the doctors
called iliac passion. He then left that part of the country and returned
but rarely to his estates. These were situated about six leagues from
Roche-Mauprat, on the borders of the Varenne du Fromental. He was a
prudent man and a just, because he was cultured, because his father had
moved with the spirit of his century, and had had him educated. None the
less he had preserved a firm character and an enterprising mind, and,
like his ancestors, he was proud of hearing as a sort of surname the
knightly title of Headbreaker, hereditary in the original Mauprat stock.
As for the elder branch, it had turned out so badly, or rather had
preserved from the old feudal days such terrible habits of brigandage,
that it had won for itself the distinctive title of Hamstringer. [I
hazard “Headbreaker” and “Hamstringer” as poor equivalents for the
“Casse-Tete” and “Coupe-Jarret” of the French.--TR.] Of the sons of
Tristan, my father, the eldest, was the only one who married. I was his
only child. Here it is necessary to mention a fact of which I was long
ignorant. Hubert de Mauprat, on hearing of my birth, begged me of my
parents, undertaking to make me his heir if he were allowed absolute
control over my education. At a shooting-party about this time my
father was killed by an accidental shot, and my grandfather refused the
chevalier’s offer, declaring that his children were the sole legitimate
heirs of the younger branch, and that consequently he would resist with
all his might any substitution in my favour. It was then that Hubert’s
daughter was born. But when, seven years later, his wife died leaving
him this one child, the desire, so strong in the nobles of that time, to
perpetuate their name, urged him to renew his request to my mother. What
her answer was I do not know; she fell ill and died. The country doctors
again brought in a verdict of iliac passion. My grandfather had spent
the last two days she passed in this world with her.

Pour me out a glass of Spanish wine; for I feel a cold shiver running
through my body. It is nothing serious--merely the effect that these
early recollections have on me when I begin to narrate them. It will
soon pass off.

He swallowed a large glass of wine, and we did the same; for a sensation
of cold came upon us too as we gazed at his stern face and listened to
his brief, abrupt sentences. He continued:

Thus at the age of seven I found myself an orphan. My grandfather
searched my mother’s house and seized all the money and valuables he
could carry away. Then, leaving the rest, and declaring he would have
nothing to do with lawyers, he did not even wait for the funeral, but
took me by the collar and flung me on to the crupper of his horse,
saying: “Now, my young ward, come home with me; and try to stop that
crying soon, for I haven’t much patience with brats.” In fact, after
a few seconds he gave me such hard cuts with his whip that I stopped
crying, and, withdrawing myself like a tortoise into my shell, completed
the journey without daring to breathe.

He was a tall old man, bony and cross-eyed. I fancy I see him now as he
was then. The impression that evening made on me can never be effaced.
It was a sudden realization of all the horrors which my mother had
foreshadowed when speaking of her execrable father-in-law and his
brigands of sons. The moon, I remember, was shining here and there
through the dense foliage of the forest. My grandfather’s horse was
lean, hardy, and bad-tempered like himself. It kicked at every cut of
the whip, and its master gave it plenty. Swift as an arrow it jumped the
ravines and little torrents which everywhere intersect Varenne in all
directions. At each jump I lost my balance, and clung in terror to the
saddle or my grandfather’s coat. As for him, he was so little concerned
about me that, had I fallen, I doubt whether he would have taken the
trouble to pick me up. Sometimes, noticing my terror, he would jeer at
me, and, to make me still more afraid, set his horse plunging again.
Twenty times, in a frenzy of despair, I was on the point of throwing
myself off; but the instinctive love of life prevented me from giving
way to the impulse. At last, about midnight, we suddenly stopped before
a small pointed gate, and the drawbridge was soon lifted behind us. My
grandfather took me, bathed in a cold sweat as I was, and threw me
over to a great fellow, lame and horribly ugly, who carried me into the
house. This was my Uncle John, and I was at Roche-Mauprat.

At that time my grandfather, along with his eight sons, formed the last
relic in our province of that race of petty feudal tyrants by
which France had been overrun and harassed for so many centuries.
Civilization, already advancing rapidly towards the great convulsion of
the Revolution, was gradually stamping out the systematic extortions
of these robbers. The light of education, a species of good taste
reflected, however dimly, from a polished court, and perhaps a
presentiment of the impending terrible awakening of the people, were
spreading through the castles and even through the half-rustic manors
of the lordlings. Ever in our midland provinces, the most backward by
reason of their situation, the sentiment of social equality was
already driving out the customs of a barbarous age. More than one vile
scapegrace had been forced to reform, in spite of his privileges; and
in certain places where the peasants, driven to desperation, had rid
themselves of their overlord, the law had not dreamt of interfering, nor
had the relatives dared to demand redress.

In spite of the prevailing tone of mind, my grandfather had long
maintained his position in the country without experiencing any
opposition. But, having had a large family, endowed like himself with a
goodly number of vices, he finally found himself pestered and besieged
by creditors who, instead of being frightened by his threats, as of old,
were themselves threatening to make him suffer. He was obliged to devise
some means of avoiding the bailiffs on the one hand, and, on the other,
the fights which were continually taking place. In these fights the
Mauprats no longer shone, despite their numbers, their complete union,
and their herculean strength; since the whole population of the district
sided with their opponents and took upon itself the duty of stoning
them. So, rallying his progeny around him, as the wild boar gathers
together its young after a hunt, Tristan withdrew into his castle and
ordered the drawbridge to be raised. Shut up with him were ten or twelve
peasants, his servants, all of them poachers or refugees, who like
himself had some interest in “retiring from the world” (his own
expression), and in finding a place of safety behind good stout walls.
An enormous pile of hunting weapons, duck-guns, carbines, blunderbusses,
spears, and cutlasses, were raised on the platform, and the porter
received orders never to let more than two persons at a time approach
within range of his gun.

From that day Mauprat and his sons broke with all civil laws as they had
already broken with all moral laws. They formed themselves into a band
of adventurers. While their well-beloved and trusty poachers supplied
the house with game, they levied illegal taxes on the small farms in the
neighbourhood. Now, without being cowards (and they are far from that),
the peasants of our province, as you know, are meek and timid, partly
from listlessness, partly from distrust of the law, which they have
never understood, and of which even to this day they have but a scanty
knowledge. No province of France has preserved more old traditions or
longer endured the abuses of feudalism. Nowhere else, perhaps, has the
title of the lord of the manor been handed down, as hitherto with us, to
the owners of certain estates; and nowhere is it so easy to frighten the
people with reports of some absurd and impossible political event. At
the time of which I speak the Mauprats, being the only powerful family
in a district remote from towns and cut off from communication with the
outside world, had little difficulty in persuading their vassals that
serfdom was about to be re-established, and that it would go hard with
all who resisted. The peasants hesitated, listened timorously to the few
among themselves who preached independence, then thought the matter over
and decided to submit. The Mauprats were clever enough not to demand
money of them, for money is what the peasant in such a district
obtains with the greatest difficulty, and parts from with the greatest
reluctance. “Money is dear,” is one of his proverbs, because in his
eyes money stands for something different from manual labour. It means
traffic with men and things outside his world, an effort of foresight or
circumspection, a bargain, a sort of intellectual struggle, which lifts
him out of his ordinary heedless habits; it means, in a word, mental
labour, and this for him is the most painful and the most wearing.

The Mauprats, knowing how the ground lay, and having no particular need
of money any longer, since they had repudiated their debts, demanded
payments in kind only. They ruled that one man should contribute capons,
another calves, a third corn, a fourth fodder, and so on. They were
careful, too, to tax judiciously, to demand from each the commodity
he could provide with least inconvenience to himself. In return they
promised help and protection to all; and up to a certain point they kept
their word. They cleared the land of wolves and foxes, gave a welcome
and a hiding-place to all deserters, and helped to defraud the state by
intimidating the excise officers and tax-collectors.

They took advantage of their power to give the poor man a false notion
of his real interests, and to corrupt the simple folk by undermining all
sense of their dignity and natural liberty. They made the whole district
combine in a sort of secession from the law, and they so frightened
the functionaries appointed to enforce respect for it, that after a few
years it fell into a veritable desuetude. Thus it happened that, while
France at a short distance from this region was advancing with rapid
strides towards the enfranchisement of the poorer classes, Varenne was
executing a retrograde march and returning at full speed to the ancient
tyranny of the country squires. It was easy enough for the Mauprats to
pervert these poor folk; they feigned a friendly interest in them
to mark their difference from the other nobles in the province whose
manners still retained some of the haughtiness of their ancient power.
Above all, my grandfather lost no opportunity of making the peasants
share his own hatred of his own cousin, Hubert de Mauprat. The latter,
whenever he interviewed his vassals, would remain seated in his
arm-chair, while they stood before him bareheaded; whereas Tristan de
Mauprat would make them sit down at his table, and drink some of the
wine they had brought him as a sign of voluntary homage. He would then
have them led home by his men in the middle of the night, all dead
drunk, torches in hand, and making the forest resound with ribald songs.
Libertinism completed the demoralization of the peasantry. In every
family the Mauprats soon had their mistresses. This was tolerated,
partly because it was profitable, and partly (alas! that it should
have to be said) because it gratified vanity. The very isolation of the
houses was favourable to the evil. No scandal, no denunciation were
to be feared. The tiniest village would have been sufficient for the
creation and maintenance of a public opinion. There, however, there
were only scattered cottages and isolated farms; wastes and woods so
separated the families from one another that the exercise of any mutual
control was impossible. Shame is stronger than conscience. I need not
tell you of all the bonds of infamy that united masters and slaves.
Debauchery, extortion, and fraud were both precept and example for my
youth, and life went on merrily. All notions of justice were scoffed at;
creditors were defrauded of both interest and capital; any law officer
who ventured to serve a summons received a sound thrashing, and the
mounted police were fired on if they approached too near the turrets. A
plague on parliament; starvation to all imbued with the new philosophy;
and death to the younger branch of the Mauprats--such were the
watchwords of these men who, to crown all, gave themselves the airs of
knights-errant of the twelfth century. My grandfather talked of nothing
but his pedigree and the prowess of his ancestors. He regretted the good
old days when every lordling had instruments of torture in his manor,
and dungeons, and, best, of all cannon. In ours we only had pitchforks
and sticks, and a second-rate culverin which my Uncle John used to
point--and point very well, in fact--and which was sufficient to keep at
a respectful distance the military force of the district.




II

Old Mauprat was a treacherous animal of the carnivorous order, a
cross between a lynx and a fox. Along with a copious and easy flow of
language, he had a veneer of education which helped his cunning. He made
a point of excessive politeness, and had great powers of persuasion,
even with the objects of his vengeance. He knew how to entice them to
his castle, where he would make them undergo frightful ill-treatment,
for which, however, having no witnesses, they were unable to obtain
redress by law. All his villainies bore the stamp of such consummate
skill that the country came to view them with a sort of awe akin to
respect. No one could ever catch him out of his den, though he issued
forth often enough, and apparently without taking many precautions. In
truth, he was a man with a genius for evil; and his sons, bound to him
by no ties of affection, of which, indeed, they were incapable, yet
acknowledged the sway of this superior evil genius, and gave him
a uniform and ready obedience, in which there was something almost
fanatic. He was their deliverer in all desperate cases; and when the
weariness of confinement under our chilly vaults began to fill them with
_ennui_, his mind, brutal even in jest, would cure them by arranging
for their pleasure shows worthy of a den of thieves. Sometimes poor
mendicant monks collecting alms would be terrified or tortured for their
benefit; their beards would be burned off, or they would be lowered into
a well and kept hanging between life and death until they had sung some
foul song or uttered some blasphemy. Everybody knows the story of the
notary who was allowed to enter in company with his four clerks, and
whom they received with all the assiduity of pompous hospitality. My
grandfather pretended to agree with a good grace to the execution of
their warrant, and politely helped them to make an inventory of his
furniture, of which the sale had been decreed. After this, when dinner
was served and the king’s men had taken their places at table, he said
to the notary:

“Ah, mon Dieu! I was forgetting a poor hack of mine in the stable. It’s
a small matter. Still, you might be reprimanded for omitting it; and
as I see that you are a worthy fellow I should be sorry to mislead you.
Come with me and see it; it won’t take us a moment.”

The notary followed Mauprat unsuspectingly. Just as they were about to
enter the stable together, Mauprat, who was leading the way, told him to
put in his head only. The notary, anxious to show great consideration in
the performance of his duties, and not to pry into things too closely,
did as he was told. Then Mauprat suddenly pushed the door to and
squeezed his neck so violently between it and the wall that the wretched
man could not breathe. Deeming him sufficiently punished, Tristan opened
the door again, and, asking pardon for his carelessness, with great
civility offered the man his arm to take him back to dinner. This the
notary did not consider it wise to refuse; but as soon as he re-entered
the room where his colleagues were, he threw himself into a chair, and
pointing to his livid face and mangled neck, demanded justice for the
trap into which he had just been led. It was then that my grandfather,
revelling in his rascally wit, went through a comedy scene of sublime
audacity. He gravely reproached the notary with accusing him unjustly,
and always addressing him kindly and with studied politeness, called the
others to bear witness to his conduct, begging them to make allowances
if his precarious position had forced him to give them such a poor
reception, all the while doing the honours of the table in splendid
style. The poor notary did not dare to press the matter and was
compelled to dine, although half dead. His companions were so completely
duped by Mauprat’s assurance that they ate and drank merrily, treating
the notary as a lunatic and a boor. They left Roche-Mauprat all drunk,
singing the praises of their host, and laughing at the notary, who fell
down dead upon the threshold of his house on dismounting from his horse.

The eight sons, the pride and strength of old Mauprat, all resembled
him in physical vigour, brutality of manners, and, to some extent, in
craftiness and jesting ill-nature. The truth is they were veritable
brutes, capable of any evil, and completely dead to any noble thought
or generous sentiment. Nevertheless, they were endowed with a sort of
reckless, dashing courage which now and then seemed to have in it an
element of grandeur. But it is time that I told you about myself, and
gave you some idea of the development of my character in the thick of
this filthy mire into which it had pleased God to plunge me, on leaving
my cradle.

I should be wrong if, in order to gain your sympathy in these early
years of my life, I asserted that I was born with a noble nature, a pure
and incorruptible soul. As to this, I know nothing. Maybe there are no
incorruptible souls. Maybe there are. That is what neither you nor any
one will ever know. The great questions awaiting an answer are these:
“Are our innate tendencies invincible? If not, can they be modified
merely or wholly destroyed by education?” For myself, I would not dare
to affirm. I am neither a metaphysician, nor a psychologist, nor a
philosopher; but I have had a terrible life, gentlemen, and if I were a
legislator, I would order that man to have his tongue torn out, or
his head cut off, who dared to preach or write that the nature of
individuals is unchangeable, and that it is no more possible to reform
the character of a man than the appetite of a tiger. God has preserved
me from believing this.

All I can tell you is that my mother instilled into me good principles,
though, perhaps, I was not endowed by nature with her good qualities.
Even with her I was of a violent disposition, but my violence was
sullen and suppressed. I was blind and brutal in anger, nervous even to
cowardice at the approach of danger, daring almost to foolhardiness when
hand to hand with it--that is to say, at once timid and brave from my
love of life. My obstinacy was revolting; yet my mother alone could
conquer me; and without attempting to reason, for my mind developed very
slowly, I used to obey her as if by a sort of magnetic necessity. This
one guiding hand which I remember, and another woman’s which I felt
later, were and have been sufficient to lead me towards good. But I lost
my mother before she had been able to teach me anything seriously; and
when I was transplanted to Roche-Mauprat, my feeling for the evil done
there was merely an instinctive aversion, feeble enough, perhaps, if
fear had not been mingled with it.

But I thank Heaven from the bottom of my heart for the cruelties
heaped upon me there, and above all for the hatred which my Uncle John
conceived for me. My ill-fortune preserved me from indifference in
the presence of evil, and my sufferings helped me to detest those who
wrought it.

This John was certainly the most detestable of his race. Ever since a
fall from his horse had maimed him, his evil temper had developed
in proportion to his inability to do as much harm as his companions.
Compelled to remain at home when the others set out on their
expeditions, for he could not bestride a horse, he found his only chance
of pleasure in those fruitless little attacks which the mounted police
sometimes made on the castle, as if to ease their conscience. Then,
intrenched behind a rampart of freestone which he had had built to
suit himself, John, calmly seated near his culverin, would pick off
a gentleman from time to time, and at once regain, as he said, his
sleeping and eating power, which want of exercise had taken from him.
And he would even climb up to his beloved platform without waiting for
the excuse of an attack, and there, crouching down like a cat ready to
spring, as soon as he saw any one appear in the distance without giving
the signal, he would try his skill upon the target, and make the man
retrace his steps. This he called sweeping the path clean.

As I was too young to accompany my uncles on their hunting and
plundering expeditions, John naturally became my guardian and
tutor--that is to say, my jailor and tormentor. I will not give you all
the details of that infernal existence. For nearly ten years I endured
cold, hunger, insults, the dungeon, and blows, according to the more or
less savage caprices of this monster. His fierce hatred of me arose
from the fact that he could not succeed in depraving me; my rugged,
headstrong, and unsociable nature preserved me from his vile seductions.
It is possible that I had not any strong tendencies to virtue; to hatred
I luckily had. Rather than do the bidding of my tyrant I would have
suffered a thousand deaths. And so I grew up without conceiving any
affection for vice. However, my notions about society were so strange
that my uncles’ mode of life did not in itself cause me any repugnance.
Seeing that I was brought up behind the walls of Roche-Mauprat, and that
I lived in a state of perpetual siege, you will understand that I had
precisely such ideas as any armed retainer in the barbarous ages of
feudalism might have had. What, outside our den, was termed by other men
assassinating, plundering, and torturing, I was taught to call fighting,
conquering, and subduing. My sole knowledge of history consisted of
an acquaintance with certain legends and ballads of chivalry which my
grandfather used to repeat to me of an evening, when he had time to
think of what he was pleased to call my education. Whenever I asked him
any question about the present time, he used to answer that times had
sadly changed, that all Frenchmen had become traitors and felons, that
they had frightened their kings, and that these, like cravens, had
deserted the nobles, who in their turn had been cowardly enough to
renounce their privileges and let laws be made for them by clodhoppers.
I listened with surprise, almost with indignation, to this account of
the age in which I lived, for me an age of shadows and mysteries. My
grandfather had but vague ideas of chronology; not a book of any kind
was to be found at Roche-Mauprat, except, I should say, the History of
the Sons of Aymon, and a few chronicles of the same class brought by our
servants from country fairs. Three names, and only three, stood clear in
the chaos of my ignorance--Charlemagne, Louis XI, and Louis XIV; because
my grandfather would frequently introduce these into dissertations on
the unrecognised rights of the nobles. In truth, I was so ignorant that
I scarcely knew the difference between a reign and a race; and I was by
no means sure that my grandfather had not seen Charlemagne, for he spoke
of him more frequently and more gladly than of any other man.

But, while my native energy led me to admire the exploits of my uncles,
and filled me with a longing to share in them, the cold-blooded cruelty
they perpetrated on returning from their expeditions, and the perfidious
artifices by which they lured their dupes to the castle, in order
to torture them to extort ransom, roused in me strange and painful
emotions, which, now that I am speaking in all sincerity, it would be
difficult for me to account for exactly. In the absence of all ordinary
moral principles it might have been natural for me to accept the theory
which I daily saw carried into practice, that makes it right; but the
humiliation and suffering which my Uncle John inflicted on me in virtue
of this theory, taught me to be dissatisfied with it. I could appreciate
the right of the bravest, and I genuinely despised those who, with death
in their power, yet chose life at the price of such ignominy as they
had to bear at Roche-Mauprat. But I could only explain these insults and
horrors heaped on prisoners, some of them women and mere children,
as manifestations of bloodthirsty appetites. I do not know if I was
sufficiently susceptible of a noble sentiment to be inspired with pity
for the victim; but certain it is that I experienced that feeling
of selfish commiseration which is common to all natures, and which,
purified and ennobled, has become charity among civilized peoples. Under
my coarse exterior my heart no doubt merely felt passing shocks of fear
and disgust at the sight of punishments which I myself might have to
endure any day at the caprice of my oppressors; especially as John,
when he saw me turn pale at these frightful spectacles, had a habit of
saying, in a mocking tone:

“That’s what I’ll do to you when you are disobedient.”

All I know is that in presence of such iniquitous acts I experienced a
horrible uneasiness; my blood curdled in my veins, my throat began
to close, and I had to rush away, so as not to repeat the cries which
pierced my ears. In time, however, I became somewhat hardened to these
terrible impressions. The fibres of feeling grew tougher, and habit gave
me power to hide what they termed my cowardice. I even felt ashamed of
the signs of weakness I showed, and forced my face into the hyena
smile which I saw on the faces of my kinsmen. But I could never prevent
convulsive shudders from running through my limbs, and the coldness as
of death from falling on my heart, at the recollection of these scenes
of agony. The women, dragged half-willingly, half by force, under the
roof of Roche-Mauprat, caused me inconceivable agitation. I began to
feel the fires of youth kindling within me, and even to look with envy
on this part of my uncles’ spoil; but with these new-born desires were
mingled inexpressible pangs. To all around me women were merely objects
of contempt, and vainly did I try to separate this idea from that of the
pleasure which was luring me. My mind was bewildered, and my irritated
nerves imparted a violent and sickly strain to all my temptations. In
other matters, I had as vile a disposition as my companions; if my heart
was better than theirs, my manners were no less arrogant, and my jokes
in no better taste. And here it may be well to give you an illustration
of my youthful malice, especially as the results of these events have
had an influence on the rest of my life.




III

Some three leagues from Roche-Mauprat, on your way to Fromental, you
must have noticed an old tower standing by itself in the middle of the
woods. It is famous for the tragic death of a prisoner about a century
ago. The executioner, on his rounds, thought good to hang him without
any further formality, merely to gratify an old Mauprat, his overlord.

At the time of which I am speaking Gazeau Tower was already deserted
and falling into ruins. It was state property, and, more from negligence
than kindness, the authorities had allowed a poor old fellow to take
up his abode there. He was quite a character, used to live completely
alone, and was known in the district as Gaffer Patience.

“Yes,” I interrupted; “I have heard my nurse’s grandmother speak of him;
she believed he was a sorcerer.”

Exactly so; and while we are at this point let me tell you what sort of
a man this Patience really was, for I shall have to speak of him more
than once in the course of my story. I had opportunities of studying him
thoroughly.

Patience, then, was a rustic philosopher. Heaven had endowed him with
a keen intellect, but he had had little education. By a sort of strange
fatality, his brain had doggedly resisted the little instruction he
might have received. For instance, he had been to the Carmelite’s school
at ----, and instead of showing any aptitude for work, he had played
truant with a keener delight than any of his school-fellows. His was
an eminently contemplative nature, kindly and indolent, but proud and
almost savage in its love of independence; religious, yet opposed to
all authority; somewhat captious, very suspicious, and inexorable with
hypocrites. The observances of the cloister inspired him with but little
awe; and as a result of once or twice speaking his mind too freely to
the monks he was expelled from the school. From that time forth he was
the sworn foe of what he called monkism, and declared openly for the
cure of the Briantes, who was accused of being a Jansenist. In the
instruction of Patience, however, the cure succeeded no better than the
monks. The young peasant, endowed though he was with herculean strength
and a great desire for knowledge, displayed an unconquerable aversion
for every kind of work, whether physical or mental. He professed a sort
of artless philosophy which the cure found it very difficult to argue
against. There was, he said, no need for a man to work as long as he did
not want money; and he was in no need of money as long as his wants were
moderate. Patience practised what he preached: during the years when
passions are so powerful he lived a life of austerity, drank nothing
but water, never entered a tavern, and never joined in a dance. He was
always very awkward and shy with women, who, it must be owned, found
little to please in his eccentric character, stern face, and somewhat
sarcastic wit. As if to avenge himself for this by showing his contempt,
or to console himself by displaying his wisdom, he took a pleasure, like
Diogenes of old, in decrying the vain pleasures of others; and if at
times he was to be seen passing under the branches in the middle of the
fetes, it was merely to throw out some shaft of scorn, a flash from his
inexorable good sense. Sometimes, too, his uncompromising morality found
expression in biting words, which left clouds of sadness or fear hanging
over agitated consciences. This naturally gained him violent enemies;
and the efforts of impotent hatred, helped by the feeling of awe which
his eccentric behaviour produced, fastened upon him the reputation of a
sorcerer.

When I said that Patience was lacking in education, I expressed myself
badly. Longing for a knowledge of the sublime mysteries of Nature,
his mind wished to soar to heaven on its first flight. From the very
beginning, the Jansenist vicar was so perplexed and startled by
the audacity of his pupil, he had to say so much to calm him into
submission, he was obliged to sustain such assaults of bold questions
and proud objections, that he had no leisure to teach him the alphabet;
and at the end of ten years of studies, broken off and taken up at the
bidding of a whim or on compulsion, Patience could not even read. It was
only with great difficulty, after poring over a book for some two hours,
that he deciphered a single page, and even then he did not grasp the
meaning of most of the words expressing abstract ideas. Yet these
abstract ideas were undoubtedly in him; you felt their presence while
watching and listening to him; and the way in which he managed to embody
them in homely phrase enlivened with a rude poetry was so marvellous,
that one scarcely knew whether to feel astounded or amused.

Always serious, always positive himself, he scorned dalliance with
any dialectic. A Stoic by nature and on principle, enthusiastic in the
propagation of his doctrine of severance from false ideas, but resolute
in the practice of resignation, he made many a breach in the poor cure’s
defences; and it was in these discussions, as he often told me in his
last years, that he acquired his knowledge of philosophy. In order to
make a stand against the battering-ram of natural logic, the worthy
Jansenist was obliged to invoke the testimony of all the Fathers of the
Church, and to oppose these, often even to corroborate them, with the
teaching of all the sages and scholars of antiquity. Then Patience, his
round eyes starting from his head (this was his own expression), lapsed
into silence, and, delighted to learn without having the bother of
studying, would ask for long explanations of the doctrines of these
men, and for an account of their lives. Noticing this attention and
this silence, his adversary would exult; but just as he thought he had
convinced this rebellious soul, Patience, hearing the village clock
strike midnight, would rise, take an affectionate leave of his host, and
on the very threshold of the vicarage, would dismay the good man with
some laconic and cutting comment that confounded Saint Jerome and Plato
alike, Eusebius equally with Seneca, Tertullian no less than Aristotle.

The cure was not too ready to acknowledge the superiority of this
untutored intellect. Still, he was quite astonished at passing so many
winter evenings by his fireside with this peasant without feeling
either bored or tired; and he would wonder how it was that the village
schoolmaster, and even the prior of the convent, in spite of their Greek
and Latin, appeared to him, the one a bore, the other a sophist, in all
their discussions. Knowing the perfect purity of the peasant’s life,
he attributed the ascendency of his mind to the power of virtue and the
charm it spreads over all things. Then, each evening, he would humbly
accuse himself before God of not having disputed with his pupil from a
sufficiently Christian point of view; he would confess to his guardian
angel that pride in his own learning and joy at being listened to
so devoutly had carried him somewhat beyond the bounds of religious
instruction; that he had quoted profane writers too complacently;
that he had even experienced a dangerous pleasure in roaming with
his disciple through the fields of the past, plucking pagan flowers
unsprinkled by the waters of baptism, flowers in whose fragrance a
priest should not have found such delight.

On his side, Patience loved the cure dearly. He was his only friend,
his only bond of union with society, his only bond of union, through
the light of knowledge, with God. The peasant largely over-estimated his
pastor’s learning. He did not know that even the most enlightened men
often draw wrong conclusions, or no conclusions at all, from the course
of progress. Patience would have been spared great distress of mind if
he could have seen for certain that his master was frequently mistaken
and that it was the man, not the truth, that was at fault. Not knowing
this, and finding the experience of the ages at variance with his innate
sense of justice, he was continually a prey to agonizing reveries; and,
living by himself, and wandering through the country at all hours of the
day and night, wrapped in thoughts undreamed of by his fellows, he gave
more and more credit to the tales of sorcery reported against him.

The convent did not like the pastor. A few monks whom Patience had
unmasked hated Patience. Hence, both pastor and pupil were persecuted.
The ignorant monks did not scruple to accuse the cure to his bishop of
devoting himself to the occult sciences in concert with the magician
Patience. A sort of religious war broke out in the village and
neighbourhood. All who were not for the convent were for the cure,
and _vice versa_. Patience scorned to take part in this struggle. One
morning he went to see his friend, with tears in his eyes, and said to
him:

“You are the one man in all the world that I love, and I will not have
you persecuted on my account. Since, after you, I neither know nor
care for a soul, I am going off to live in the woods, like the men
of primitive times. I have inherited a field which brings me in fifty
francs a year. It is the only land I have ever stirred with these hands,
and half its wretched rent has gone to pay the tithe of labour I owe the
seignior. I trust to die without ever doing duty as a beast of burden
for others. And yet, should they remove you from your office, or rob you
of your income, if you have a field that needs ploughing, only send me
word, and you will see that these arms have not grown altogether stiff
in their idleness.”

It was in vain that the pastor opposed this resolve. Patience departed,
carrying with him as his only belonging the coat he had on his back,
and an abridgment of the teachings of Epictetus. For this book he had a
great affection, and, thanks to much study of it, could read as many
as three of its pages a day without unduly tiring himself. The rustic
anchorite went into the desert to live. At first he built himself a hut
of branches in a wood. Then, as wolves attacked him, he took refuge in
one of the lower halls of Gazeau Tower, which he furnished luxuriously
with a bed of moss, and some stumps of trees; wild roots, wild fruit,
and goat’s milk constituted a daily fare very little inferior to what
he had had in the village. This is no exaggeration. You have to see the
peasants in certain parts of Varenne to form an idea of the frugal diet
on which a man can live and keep in good health. In the midst of these
men of stoical habits all round him, Patience was still exceptional.
Never had wine reddened his lips, and bread had seemed to him a
superfluity. Besides, the doctrine of Pythagoras was not wholly
displeasing to him; and in the rare interviews which he henceforth had
with his friend he would declare that, without exactly believing in
metempsychosis, and without making it a rule to eat vegetables only, he
felt a secret joy at being able to live thus, and at having no further
occasion to see death dealt out every day to innocent animals.

Patience had formed this curious resolution at the age of forty. He was
sixty when I saw him for the first time, and he was then possessed of
extraordinary physical vigour. In truth, he was in the habit of roaming
about the country every year. However, in proportion as I tell you about
my own life, I shall give you details of the hermit life of Patience.

At the time of which I am about to speak, the forest rangers, more
from fear of his casting a spell over them than out of compassion, had
finally ceased their persecutions, and given him full permission to
live in Gazeau Tower, not, however, without warning him that it would
probably fall about his head during the first gale of wind. To this
Patience had replied philosophically that if he was destined to be
crushed to death, the first tree in the forest would do the work quite
as well as the walls of Gazeau Tower.

Before putting my actor Patience on the stage, and with many apologies
for inflicting on you such a long preliminary biography, I have still to
mention that during the twenty years of which I have spoken the cure’s
mind had bowed to a new power. He loved philosophy, and in spite of
himself, dear man, could not prevent this love from embracing the
philosophers too, even the least orthodox. The works of Jean Jacques
Rousseau carried him away into new regions, in spite of all his efforts
at resistance; and when one morning, when returning from a visit to some
sick folk, he came across Patience gathering his dinner of herbs from
the rocks of Crevant, he sat down near him on one of the druidical
stones and made, without knowing it, the profession of faith of the
Savoyard vicar. Patience drank more willingly of this poetic religion
than of the ancient orthodoxy. The pleasure with which he listened to
a summary of the new doctrines led the cure to arrange secret meetings
with him in isolated parts of Varenne, where they agreed to come
upon each other as if by chance. At these mysterious interviews the
imagination of Patience, fresh and ardent from long solitude, was fired
with all the magic of the thoughts and hopes which were then fermenting
in France, from the court of Versailles to the most uninhabitable heath.
He became enamoured of Jean Jacques, and made the cure read as much of
him as he possibly could without neglecting his duties. Then he begged a
copy of the _Contrat Social_, and hastened to Gazeau Tower to spell his
way through it feverishly. At first the cure had given him of this manna
only with a sparing hand, and while making him admire the lofty thoughts
and noble sentiments of the philosopher, had thought to put him on his
guard against the poison of anarchy. But all the old learning, all the
happy texts of bygone days--in a word, all the theology of the worthy
priest--was swept away like a fragile bridge by the torrent of wild
eloquence and ungovernable enthusiasm which Patience had accumulated
in his desert. The vicar had to give way and fall back terrified upon
himself. There he discovered that the shrine of his own science was
everywhere cracking and crumbling to ruin. The new sun which was rising
on the political horizon and making havoc in so many minds, melted his
own like a light snow under the first breath of spring. The sublime
enthusiasm of Patience; the strange poetic life of the man which seemed
to reveal him as one inspired; the romantic turn which their mysterious
relations were taking (the ignoble persecutions of the convent making it
noble to revolt)--all this so worked upon the priest that by 1770 he had
already travelled far from Jansenism, and was vainly searching all the
religious heresies for some spot on which he might rest before falling
into the abyss of philosophy so often opened at his feet by Patience, so
often hidden in vain by the exorcisms of Roman theology.




IV

After this account of the philosophical life of Patience, set forth
by me now in manhood (continued Bernard, after a pause), it is not
altogether easy to return to the very different impressions I received
in boyhood on meeting the wizard of Gazeau Tower. I will make an effort,
however, to reproduce my recollections faithfully.

It was one summer evening, as I was returning from bird-snaring with
several peasant-boys, that I passed Gazeau Tower for the first time.
My age was about thirteen, and I was bigger and stronger than any of my
comrades; besides, I exercised over them, sternly enough, the authority
I drew from my noble birth. In fact, the mixture of familiarity and
etiquette in our intercourse was rather fantastic. Sometimes, when the
excitement of sport or the fatigue of the day had greater powers over
them than I, they used to have their own way; and I already knew how
to yield at the right moment, as tyrants do, so as always to avoid the
appearance of being compelled. However, I generally found a chance for
revenge, and soon saw them trembling before the hated name of my family.

Well, night was coming on, and we were walking along gaily, whistling,
knocking down crab-apples with stones, imitating the notes of birds,
when the boy who was ahead suddenly stopped, and, coming back to us,
declared that he was not going by the Gazeau Tower path, but would
rather cut across the wood. This idea was favoured by two others. A
third objected that we ran the risk of losing ourselves if we left the
path, that night was near, and that there were plenty of wolves about.

“Come on, you funks!” I cried in a princely tone, pushing forward the
guide; “follow the path, and have done with this nonsense.”

“Not me,” said the youngster. “I’ve just seen the sorcerer at his door
saying magic words, and I don’t want to have a fever all the year.”

“Bah!” said another; “he doesn’t do harm to everybody. He never hurts
children; and, besides, we have only to pass by very quietly without
saying anything to him. What do you suppose he’ll do to us?”

“Oh, it would be all right if we were alone,” answered the first; “but
M. Bernard is here; we’re sure to have a spell cast on us.”

“What do you say, you fool?” I cried, doubling my fist.

“It’s not my fault, my lord,” replied the boy. “That old wretch doesn’t
like the gentry, and he has said he would be glad to see M. Tristan and
all his sons hanging from the same bough.”

“He said that, did he? Good!” I answered. “Come on, and you shall see.
All who are my friends will follow; any one that leaves me is a coward.”

Two of my companions, out of vanity, let themselves be drawn on. The
others pretended to imitate them; but, after a few steps, they had all
taken flight and disappeared into the copse. However, I went on proudly,
escorted by my two acolytes. Little Sylvain, who was in front, took off
his hat as soon as he saw Patience in the distance; and when we arrived
opposite him, though the man was looking on the ground without appearing
to notice us, he was seized with terror, and said, in a trembling voice:

“Good evening, Master Patience; a good night’s rest to you.”

The sorcerer, roused out of his reverie, started like a man waked from
sleep; and I saw, not without a certain emotion, his weather-beaten face
half covered with a thick gray beard. His big head was quite bald, and
the bareness of his forehead only served to make his bushy eyebrows
more prominent. Behind these his round deepset eyes seemed to flash
like lightning at the end of summer behind the fading foliage. He was
of small stature, but very broad-shouldered; in fact, built like a
gladiator. The rags in which he was clad were defiantly filthy. His face
was short and of a vulgar type, like that of Socrates; and if the fire
of genius glowed in his strongly marked features, I certainly could not
perceive it. He appeared to me a wild beast, an unclean animal. Filled
with a sense of loathing, and determined to avenge the insult he had
offered to my name, I put a stone in my sling, and without further ado
hurled it at him with all my might.

At the moment the stone flew out, Patience was in the act of replying to
the boy’s greeting.

“Good evening, lads; God be with you!” he was saying when the stone
whistled past his ear and struck a tame owl of which Patience had made a
pet, and which at the approach of night was beginning to rouse itself in
the ivy above the door.

The owl gave a piercing cry and fell bleeding at the feet of its
master, who answered it with a roar of anger. For a few seconds he stood
motionless with surprise and fury. Then suddenly, taking the palpitating
victim by the feet, he lifted it up, and, coming towards us, cried in a
voice of thunder:

“Which of you wretches threw that stone?”

The boy who had been walking behind, flew with the swiftness of the
wind; but Sylvain, seized by the great hand of the sorcerer, fell
upon his knees, swearing by the Holy Virgin and by Saint Solange, the
patroness of Berry, that he was innocent of the death of the bird. I
felt, I confess, a strong inclination to let him get out of the scrape
as best he could, and make my escape into the thicket. I had expected
to see a decrepit old juggler, not to fall into the hands of a robust
enemy; but pride held me back.

“If you did this,” said Patience to my trembling comrade, “I pity you;
for you are a wicked child, and you will grow into a dishonest man. You
have done a bad deed; you have made it your pleasure to cause pain to
an old man who never did you any harm; and you have done this
treacherously, like a coward, while feigning politeness and bidding him
good-evening. You are a liar, a miscreant; you have robbed me of my only
society, my only riches; you have taken delight in evil. God preserve
you from living if you are going on in this way.”

“Oh, Monsieur Patience!” cried the boy, clasping his hands; “do not
curse me; do not bewitch me; do not give me any illness; it wasn’t I!
May God strike me dead if it was!”

“If it wasn’t you, it was this one, then!” said Patience, seizing me by
the coat-collar and shaking me like a young tree to be uprooted.

“Yes, I did it,” I replied, haughtily; “and if you wish to know my name,
learn that I am called Bernard Mauprat, and that a peasant who lays a
hand on a nobleman deserves death.”

“Death! You! You would put me to death, Mauprat!” cried the old man,
petrified with surprise and indignation. “And what would God be, then,
if a brat like you had a right to threaten a man of my age? Death! Ah,
you are a genuine Mauprat, and you bite like your breed, cursed whelp!
Such things as they talk of putting to death the very moment they are
born! Death, my wolf-cub! Do you know it is yourself who deserves death,
not for what you have just done, but for being the son of your father,
and the nephew of your uncles? Ah! I am glad to hold a Mauprat in the
hollow of my hand, and see whether a cur of a nobleman weighs as much as
a Christian.”

As he spoke he lifted me from the ground as he would have lifted a hare.

“Little one,” he said to my comrade, “you can run home; you needn’t
be afraid. Patience rarely gets angry with his equals; and he always
pardons his brothers, because his brothers are ignorant like himself,
and know not what they do; but a Mauprat, look you, is a thing that
knows how to read and write, and is only the viler for it all. Run
away, then. But no; stay; I should like you once in your life to see
a nobleman receive a thrashing from the hand of a peasant. And that is
what you are going to see; and I ask you not to forget it, little one,
and to tell your parents about it.”

Livid, and gnashing my teeth with rage, I made desperate efforts to
resist. Patience, with hideous calmness, bound me to a tree with an
osier shoot. At the touch of his great horny hand I bent like a reed;
and yet I was remarkably strong for my age. He fixed the owl to a branch
above my head, and the bird’s blood, as it fell on me drop by drop,
caused me unspeakable horror; for though this was only the correction
we administer to sporting dogs that worry game, my brain, bewildered by
rage, despair, and my comrades’ cries, began to imagine some
frightful witchcraft. However, I really think I would rather have
been metamorphosed into an owl at once than undergo the punishment he
inflicted on me. In vain did I fling threats at him; in vain did I take
terrible vows of vengeance; in vain did the peasant child throw himself
on his knees again and supplicate:

“Monsieur Patience, for God’s sake, for your own sake, don’t harm him;
the Mauprats will kill you.”

He laughed, and shrugged his shoulders. Then, taking a handful of holly
twigs, he flogged me in a manner, I must own, more humiliating than
cruel; for no sooner did he see a few drops of my blood appear, than he
stopped and threw down the rod. I even noticed a sudden softening of his
features and voice, as if he were sorry for his severity.

“Mauprat,” he said, crossing his arms on his breast and looking at me
fixedly, “you have now been punished; you have now been insulted,
my fine gentleman; that is enough for me. As you see, I might easily
prevent you from ever harming me by stopping your breath with a touch of
my finger, and burying you under the stone at my door. Who would think
of coming to Gaffer Patience to look for this fine child of noble blood?
But, as you may also see, I am not fond of vengeance; at the first
cry of pain that escaped you, I stopped. No; I don’t like to cause
suffering; I’m not a Mauprat. Still, it was well for you to learn by
experience what is to be a victim. May this disgust you of the hangman’s
trade, which had been handed down from father to son in your family.
Good-evening! You can go now; I no longer bear you malice; the justice
of God is satisfied. You can tell your uncles to put me on their
gridiron; they will have a tough morsel to eat; and they will swallow
flesh that will come to life again in their gullets and choke them.”

Then he picked up the dead owl, and looking at it sadly:

“A peasant’s child would not have done this,” he said. “This is sport
for gentle blood.”

As he retired to his door he gave utterance to an exclamation which
escaped him only on solemn occasions, and from which he derived his
curious surname:

“Patience, patience!” he cried.

This, according to the gossips, was a cabalistic formula of his; and
whenever he had been heard to pronounce it, some misfortune had happened
to the individual who had offended him. Sylvain crossed himself to ward
off the evil spirit. The terrible words resounded through the tower into
which Patience had just withdrawn, then the door closed behind him with
a bang.

My comrade was so eager to be off that he was within an ace of leaving
me there bound to the tree. As soon as he had released me, he exclaimed:

“A sign of the cross! For God’s sake, a sign of the cross! If you don’t
cross yourself you are bewitched; we shall be devoured by wolves as we
go, or else we shall meet the great monster.”

“Idiot!” I said; “I have something else to think about. Listen; if you
are ever unlucky enough to tell a single soul of what has happened, I
will strangle you.”

“Alas! sir, what am I to do?” he replied with a mixture of innocence and
malice. “The sorcerer said I was to tell my parents.”

I raised my fist to strike him, but my strength failed. Choking with
rage at the treatment I had just undergone, I fell down almost in a
faint, and Sylvain seized the opportunity for flight.

When I came to I found myself alone. I did not know this part of
Varenne; I had never been here before, and it was horribly wild. All
through the day I had seen tracks of wolves and wild boars in the sand.
And now night had come and I was still two leagues from Roche-Mauprat.
The gate would be shut, the drawbridge up; and I should get a bullet
through me if I tried to enter after nine o’clock. As I did not know
the way, it was a hundred to one against my doing the two leagues in an
hour. However, I would have preferred to die a thousand deaths rather
than ask shelter of the man in Gazeau Tower, even had he granted it
gracefully. My pride was bleeding more than my flesh.

I started off at a run, heedless of all risks. The path made a thousand
turns; a thousand other paths kept crossing it. When I reached the plain
I found myself in a pasture surrounded by hedges. There every trace of
the path disappeared. I jumped the hedge at a venture, and fell into a
field. The night was pitch-dark; even had it been day it would have been
impossible to ascertain my way in the midst of little properties buried
between high banks bristling with thorns. Finally I reached a heath,
then some woods; and my fears, which had been somewhat subdued, now grew
intense. Yes, I own I was a prey to mortal terrors. Trained to bravery,
as a dog is to sport, I bore myself well enough before others. Spurred
by vanity, indeed, I was foolishly bold when I had spectators; but left
to myself, in the middle of the night, exhausted by toil and hunger,
though with no longing for food, unhinged by the emotions I had just
experienced, certain that my uncles would beat me when I returned, yet
as anxious to return as if I were going to find paradise on earth at
Roche-Mauprat, I wandered about until daybreak, suffering indescribable
agonies. The howls of wolves, happily far off, more than once reached
my ears and froze the blood in my veins; and, as if my position had not
been perilous enough in reality, my overwrought imagination must needs
add to it a thousand extravagant fantasies. Patience had the reputation
of being a wolf-rearer. This, as you know, is a cabalistic speciality
accredited in all countries. I kept on fancying, therefore, that I saw
this devilish little gray-beard, escorted by his ravening pack, and
himself in the form of a demi-wolf, pursing me through the woods.
Several times when rabbits got up at my feet I almost fell backwards
from the shock. And now, as I was certain that nobody could see, I made
many a sign of the cross; for, while affecting incredulity, I was, of
course, at heart filled with all the superstitions born of fear.

At last, at daybreak, I reached Roche-Mauprat. I waited in a moat until
the gates were opened, and then slipped up to my room without being
seen by anybody. As it was not altogether an unfailing tenderness that
watched over me at Roche-Mauprat, my absence had not been noticed during
the night. Meeting my Uncle John on the stairs, I led him to believe
that I had just got up; and, as the artifice proved successful, I went
off to the hayloft and slept for the rest of the day.




V

As I had nothing further to fear for myself, it would have been easy to
take vengeance on my enemy. Everything was favourable. The words he had
uttered against my family would have been sufficient without any mention
of the outrage done to my own person, which, in truth, I hardly cared to
make known. I had only to say a word, and in a quarter of an hour seven
Mauprats would have been in the saddle, delighted at the opportunity of
making an example of a man who paid them no dues. Such a man would have
seemed to them good for nothing but hanging as a warning to others.

But even if things had not been likely to reach this pitch, I somehow
felt an unconquerable aversion to asking eight men to avenge me on a
single one. Just as I was about to ask them (for, in my anger, I had
firmly resolved to do so), I was held back by some instinct for fair
dealing to which I had hitherto been a stranger, and whose presence in
myself I could hardly explain. Perhaps, too, the words of Patience had,
unknown to myself, aroused in me a healthy sense of shame. Perhaps his
righteous maledictions on the nobles had given me glimpses of the idea
of justice. Perhaps, in short, what I had hitherto despised in myself
as impulses of weakness and compassion, henceforth began dimly to take a
more solemn and less contemptible shape.

Be that as it may, I kept silent. I contented myself with thrashing
Sylvain as a punishment for having deserted me, and to impress upon him
that he was not to breathe a word about my unfortunate adventure. The
bitterness of the recollection was intensified by an incident which
happened toward the end of autumn when I was out with him beating the
woods for game. The poor boy was genuinely attached to me; for, my
brutality notwithstanding, he always used to be at my heels the instant
I was outside the castle. When any of his companions spoke ill of me, he
would take up my cause, and declare that I was merely somewhat hasty
and not really bad at heart. Ah, it is the gentle, resigned souls of the
humble that keep up the pride and roughness of the great. Well, we were
trying to trap larks when my sabot-shot page, who always hunted about
ahead of me, came back, saying in his rude dialect:

“I can see the wolf-driver with the mole-catcher.”

This announcement sent a shudder through all my limbs. However, the
longing for revenge produced a reaction, and I marched straight on
to meet the sorcerer. Perhaps, too, I felt somewhat reassured by the
presence of his companion, who was a frequenter of Roche-Mauprat, and
would be likely to show me respect and afford me assistance.

Marcasse, the mole-catcher, as he was called, professed to rid the
dwellings and fields of the district of polecats, weasels, rats and
other vermin. Nor did he confine his good offices to Berry; every year
he went the round of La Marche, Nivernais, Limousin, and Saintonge,
visiting, alone and on foot, all the places that had the good sense to
appreciate his talents. He was well received everywhere, in the castle
no less than in the cottage; for his was a trade that had been carried
on successfully and honestly in his family for generations (indeed, his
descendants still carry it on). Thus he had work and a home awaiting him
for every day in the year. As regular in his round as the earth in her
rotation, he would reappear on a given day at the very place where he
had appeared the year before, and always with the same dog and with the
same long sword.

This personage was as curious as the sorcerer Patience; perhaps more
comic in his way than the sorcerer. He was a bilious, melancholy man,
tall, lean, angular, full of languor, dignity, and deliberation in
speech and action. So little did he like talking that he answered all
questions in monosyllables; and yet he never failed to obey the laws of
the most scrupulous politeness, and rarely said a word without raising
his hand to the corner of his hat as a sign of respect and civility.
Was he thus by nature, or, in his itinerant trade, had this wise
reserve arisen from a fear of alienating some of his numerous clients
by incautious chatter? No one knew. In all houses he was allowed a free
hand; during the day he had the key of every granary; in the evening,
a place at the fireside of every kitchen. He knew everything that
happened; for his dreamy, absorbed air led people to talk freely in his
presence; yet he had never been known to inform any household of the
doings of another.

If you wish to know how I had become struck by this strange character,
I may tell you that I had been a witness of my uncle’s and grandfather’s
efforts to make him talk. They hoped to draw from him some information
about the chateau of Saint-Severe, the home of a man they hated and
envied, M. Hubert de Mauprat. Although Don Marcasse (they called him Don
because he seemed to have the bearing and pride of a ruined hidalgo),
although Don Marcasse, I say, had shown himself as incompressible here
as elsewhere, the Coupe-Jarret Mauprats never failed to squeeze him a
little more in the hope of extracting some details about the Casse-Tete
Mauprats.

Nobody, then, could discover Marcasse’s opinions about anything; it
would have been simplest to suppose that he did not take the trouble
to have any. Yet the attraction which Patience seemed to feel towards
him--so great that he would accompany him on his travels for several
weeks altogether--led one to believe that there was some witchery in the
man’s mysterious air, and that it was not solely the length of his sword
and the skill of his dog which played such wonderful havoc with the
moles and weasels. There were whispered rumours of the enchanted herbs
that he employed to lure these suspicious animals from their holes into
his nets. However, as people found themselves better off for his magic,
no one dreamt of denouncing it as criminal.

I do not know if you have ever seen one of the rat-hunts. It is a
curious sight, especially in a fodder-loft. The man and dog climbing up
ladders and running along beams with marvellous assurance and agility,
the dog sniffing every hole in the wall, playing the cat, crouching down
and lying in wait until the game comes out for his master’s rapier;
the man thrusting through bundles of straw and putting the enemy to the
sword--all this, when arranged and carried out with gravity and dignity
by Don Marcasse, was, I assure you, a most singular and interesting
performance.

When I saw this trusty fellow I felt equal to braving the sorcerer, and
advanced boldly. Sylvain stared at me in admiration, and I noticed that
Patience himself was not prepared for such audacity. I pretended to go
up to Marcasse and speak to him, as though quite unconcerned about
the presence of my enemy. Seeing this he gently thrust aside the
mole-catcher, and, laying his heavy hand on my head, said very quietly:

“You have grown of late, my fine gentleman!”

The blood rushed to my face, and, drawing back scornfully, I answered:

“Take care what you are doing, clodhopper; you should remember that if
you still have your two ears, it is to my kindness that you owe them.”

“My two ears!” said Patience, with a bitter laugh.

Then making an allusion to the nickname of my family, he added:

“Perhaps you mean my two hamstrings? Patience, patience! The time,
maybe, is not far distant when clodhoppers will rid the nobles of
neither ears nor hamstrings, but of their heads and their purses.”

“Silence, Master Patience!” said the mole-catcher solemnly; “these are
not the words of a philosopher.”

“You are quite right, quite right,” replied the sorcerer; “and in truth,
I don’t know why I allow myself to argue with this lad. He might have
had me made into pap by his uncles. I whipped him in the summer for
playing me a stupid trick; and I don’t know what happened to the family,
but the Mauprats lost a fine chance of injuring a neighbour.”

“Learn, peasant,” I said, “that a nobleman always takes vengeance nobly.
I did not want my wrongs avenged by people more powerful than yourself;
but wait a couple of years; I promise I will hang you with my own hand
on a certain tree that I shall easily recognise, not very far from the
door of Gazeau Tower. If I don’t I will renounce my birthright; if I
spare you I will take the title of wolf-driver.”

Patience smiled; then, suddenly becoming serious, he fixed on me that
searching look which rendered his physiognomy so striking. Then turning
to the weasel-hunter:

“It is strange,” he said; “there must be something in blood. Take the
vilest noble, and you will find that in certain things he has more
spirit than the bravest of us. Ah! it is simple enough,” he added,
speaking to himself; “they are brought up like that, whilst we--we, they
tell us, are born to obey. Patience!”

He was silent for an instant; then, rousing himself from his reverie, he
said to me in a kindly though somewhat mocking tone:

“And so you want to hang me, Monseigneur Straw-Stalk? You will have to
eat a lot of beef, then, for you are not yet tall enough to reach the
branch which is to bear me; and before then . . . perhaps many things
will happen that are not dreamt of in your little philosophy.”

“Nonsense! Why talk nonsense?” said the mole-catcher, with a serious
air; “come, make peace. Monseigneur Bernard, I ask pardon for Patience;
he is an old man, a fool.”

“No, no,” said Patience; “I want him to hang me; he is right; this is
merely my due; and, in fact, it may come more quickly than all the rest.
You must not make too much haste to grow, monsieur; for I--well, I am
making more haste to grow old than I would wish; and you who are so
brave, you would not attack a man no longer able to defend himself.”

“You didn’t hesitate to use your strength against me!” I cried.
“Confess, now; didn’t you treat me brutally? Wasn’t it a coward’s work,
that?”

“Oh, children, children!” he said. “See how the thing reasons! Out of
the mouths of children cometh truth.”

And he moved away dreamily, and muttering to himself as was his wont.
Marcasse took off his hat to me and said in an impassive tone:

“He is wrong . . . live at peace . . . pardon . . . peace . . .
farewell!”

They disappeared; and there ended my relations with Patience. I did not
come in contact with him again until long afterward.




VI

I was fifteen when my grandfather died. At Roche-Mauprat his death
caused no sorrow, but infinite consternation. He was the soul of every
vice that reigned therein, and it is certain that he was more cruel,
though less vile, than his sons. On his death the sort of glory which
his audacity had won for us grew dim. His sons, hitherto held under firm
control, became more and more drunken and debauched. Moreover, each day
added some new peril to their expeditions.

Except for the few trusty vassals whom we treated well, and who were all
devoted to us, we were becoming more and more isolated and resourceless.
People had left the neighbouring country in consequence of our violent
depredations. The terror that we inspired pushed back daily the bounds
of the desert around us. In making our ventures we had to go farther
afield, even to the borders of the plain. There we had not the upper
hand; and my Uncle Laurence, the boldest of us all, was dangerously
wounded in a skirmish. Other schemes had to be devised. John suggested
them. One was that we should slip into the fairs under various
disguises, and exercise our skill in thieving. From brigands we became
pick-pockets, and our detested name sank lower and lower in infamy.
We formed a fellowship with the most noisome characters our province
concealed, and, by an exchange of rascally services, once again managed
to avoid destitution.

I say we, for I was beginning to take a place in this band of cutthroats
when my grandfather died. He had yielded to my entreaties and allowed
me to join in some of the last expeditions he attempted. I shall make
no apologies; but here, gentlemen, you behold a man who has followed the
profession of a bandit. I feel no remorse at the recollection, no more
than a soldier would feel at having served a campaign under orders from
his general. I thought that I was still living in the middle ages. The
laws of the land, with all their strength and wisdom, were to me words
devoid of meaning. I felt brave and full of vigour; fighting was a joy.
Truly, the results of our victories often made me blush; but, as they in
no way profited myself, I washed my hands of them. Nay, I remember with
pleasure that I helped more than one victim who had been knocked down to
get up and escape.

This existence, with its movement, its dangers, and its fatigues, had a
numbing effect on me. It took me away from any painful reflections which
might have arisen in my mind. Besides, it freed me from the immediate
tyranny of John. However, after the death of my grandfather, when our
band degraded itself to exploits of a different nature, I fell back
under his odious sway. I was by no means fitted for lying and fraud. I
displayed not only aversion but also incapacity for this new industry.
Consequently my uncle looked upon me as useless, and began to maltreat
me again. They would have driven me away had they not been afraid that
I might make my peace with society, and become a dangerous enemy to
themselves. While they were in doubt as to whether it was wiser to
feed me or to live in fear of me, they often thought (as I have since
learned) of picking a quarrel with me, and forcing a fight in which I
might be got rid of. This was John’s suggestion. Antony, however, who
retained more of Tristan’s energy and love of fair play at home than any
of his brothers, proved clearly that I did more good than harm. I was,
he declared, a brave fighter, and there was no knowing when they might
need an extra hand. I might also be shaped into a swindler. I was very
young and very ignorant; but John, perhaps, would endeavour to win me
over by kindness, and make my lot less wretched. Above all, he might
enlighten me as to my true position, by explaining that I was an
outcast from society, and could not return to it without being hanged
immediately. Then, perhaps, my obstinacy and pride would give way, out
of regard to my own well-being on the one hand, and from necessity on
the other. At all events, they should try this before getting rid of me.

“For,” said Antony to round off his homily, “we were ten Mauprats last
year; our father is dead, and, if we kill Bernard, we shall only be
eight.”

This argument gained the day. They brought me forth from the species of
dungeon in which I had languished for several months; they gave me new
clothes; they exchanged my old gun for a beautiful carbine that I had
always coveted; they explained to me my position in the world; they
honoured me with the best wine at meals. I promised to reflect, and
meanwhile, became rather more brutalized by inaction and drunkenness
than I had been by brigandage.

However, my captivity had made such a terrible impression on me that
I took a secret oath to dare any dangers that might assail me on the
territories of the King of France, rather than endure a repetition of
that hideous experience. Nothing but a miserable point of honour now
kept me at Roche-Mauprat. It was evident that a storm was gathering over
our heads. The peasants were discontented, in spite of all our
efforts to attach them to us; doctrines of independence were secretly
insinuating themselves into their midst; our most faithful retainers
were growing tired of merely having their fill of bread and meat; they
were demanding money, and we had none. We had received more than one
serious summons to pay our fiscal dues to the state, and as our private
creditors had joined hands with the crown officers and the recalcitrant
peasants, everything was threatening us with a catastrophe like that
which had just overtaken the Seigneur de Pleumartin in our province.(*)

     (*) The reputation which the Seigneur de Pleumartin has left
     behind him in the province will preserve the story of
     Mauprat from the reproach of exaggeration. Pen would refuse
     to trace the savage obscenities and refinements of cruelty
     which marked the life of this madman, and which perpetuated
     the traditions of feudal brigandage in Berry down to the
     last days of the ancient monarchy. His chateau was besieged,
     and after a stubborn resistance he was taken and hanged.
     There are many people still living, nor yet very advanced in
     years, who knew the man.

My uncles had long thought of making common cause with this country
squire in his marauding expeditions and his resistance to authority.
However, just as Pleumartin, about to fall into the hands of his
enemies, had given his word of honour that he would welcome us as
friends and allies if we went to his assistance, we had heard of his
defeat and tragic end. Thus we ourselves were now on our guard night
and day. It was a question of either fleeing the country or bracing
ourselves for a decisive struggle. Some counselled the former
alternative; the others declared their resolve to follow the advice of
their dying father and to find a grave under the ruins of the keep.
Any suggestion of flight or compromise they denounced as contemptible
cowardice. The fear, then, of incurring such a reproach, and perhaps in
some measure an instinctive love of danger, still kept me back. However,
my aversion to this odious existence was only lying dormant, ready to
break out violently at any moment.

One evening, after a heavy supper, we remained at table, drinking
and conversing--God knows in what words and on what subject! It was
frightful weather. The rain, driven through the broken windows, was
running in streams across the stone floor of the hall; and the old walls
were trembling in the storm. The night wind was whistling through chinks
in the roof and making the flames of our resin torches flicker weirdly.
During the meal my uncles had rallied me very much on what they called
my virtue; they had treated my shyness in the presence of women as a
sign of continence; and it was especially in this matter that they urged
me to evil by ridiculing my modesty. While parrying these coarse gibes
and making thrusts in the same strain, I had been drinking enormously.
Consequently, my wild imagination had become inflamed, and I boasted
that I would be bolder and more successful with the first woman brought
to Roche-Mauprat than any of my uncles. The challenge was accepted amid
roars of laughter. Peals of thunder sent back an answer to the infernal
merriment.

All at once the horn was heard at the portcullis. Everybody stopped
talking. The blast just blown was the signal used by the Mauprats to
summon each other or make themselves known. It was my Uncle Laurence,
who had been absent all day and who was now asking to be let in. We had
so little confidence in others that we acted as our own turnkeys in the
fortress. John rose and took down the keys, but he stopped immediately
on hearing a second blast of the horn. This meant that Laurence was
bringing in a prize, and that we were to go and meet him. In the
twinkling of an eye all the Mauprats were at the portcullis, torch in
hand--except myself, whose indifference at this moment was profound, and
whose legs were seriously conscious of wine.

“If it is a woman,” cried Antony as he went out, “I swear by the soul of
my father that she shall be handed over to you, my valiant young man,
and we’ll see if your courage comes up to your conceit.”

I remained with my elbows on the table, sunk in an uncomfortable stupor.

When the door opened again I saw a woman in a strange costume entering
with a confident step. It required an effort to keep my mind from
wandering, and to grasp what one of the Mauprats came and whispered to
me. In the middle of a wolf-hunt, at which several of the nobles in the
neighbourhood had been present with their wives, this young lady’s horse
had taken fright and bolted away from the rest of the field. When it had
pulled up after a gallop of about a league, she had tried to find her
way back; but, not knowing the Varenne district, where all the landmarks
are so much alike, she had gone farther and farther astray. The
storm and the advent of night had completed her perplexity. Laurence,
happening to meet her, had offered to escort her to the chateau of
Rochemaure, which, as a fact, was more than six leagues distant; but
he had declared that it was quite near, and had pretended to be the
gamekeeper there. She did not actually know the lady of Rochemaure, but
being a distant connection of hers, she counted upon a welcome. Never
having seen the face of a single Mauprat, and little dreaming that she
was so near their haunt, she had followed her guide confidingly; and as
she had never in her life caught a glimpse of Roche-Mauprat, whether in
the distance or close at hand, she was led upon the scene of our orgies
without having the least suspicion of the trap into which she had
fallen.

When I rubbed my heavy eyes and beheld this woman, so young and so
beautiful, with her expression of calm sincerity and of goodness, the
like of which I had never seen on the brow of any other (for all
those who had passed the portcullis of our abode were either insolent
prostitutes or stupid victims), I could not but think I was dreaming.

Remembering how prominently fairies figured in my legends of chivalry,
I almost fancied that Morgana or Urganda had come among us to administer
justice; and, for the moment, I felt an inclination to throw myself on
my knees and protest against any judgment which should confound me
with my uncles. Antony, to whom Laurence had quickly given the cue,
approached her with as much politeness as he had in his composition, and
begged her to excuse his hunting costume, likewise that of his friends.
They were all nephews or cousins of the lady of Rochemaure, whom they
were now awaiting before sitting down to table. Being very religious,
she was at present in the chapel, in pious conference with the chaplain.
The air of simple confidence with which the stranger listened to these
absurd lies went to my heart, but I had not a very clear idea of what I
felt.

“Please,” she said to my Uncle John, who was dancing attendance on her
with the leer of a satyr, “please do not let me disturb this lady. I am
so troubled about the anxiety I must be causing my father and my friends
at the present moment, that I could not really stop here. All I ask is
that she will be kind enough to lend me a fresh horse and a guide, so
that I may return to the place where I presume my people may have gone
to wait for me.”

“Madame,” replied John, with assurance, “it is impossible for you to
start again in such weather as this; besides, if you did, that would
only serve to delay the hour of rejoining those who are looking for you.
Ten of our men, well mounted and provided with torches, shall set out
this very moment in ten different directions and scour every corner of
Varenne. Thus, in two hours at the most, your relatives will be certain
to have news of you, and you will soon see them arriving here, where we
will entertain them as best we can. Please, then, set your mind at rest,
and take some cordial to restore you; for you must be wet through and
quite exhausted.”

“Were it not for the anxiety I feel,” she answered with a smile,
“I should be famished. I will try to eat something; but do not put
yourselves to any inconvenience on my account. You have been far too
good already.”

Approaching the table, where I was still resting on my elbows, she took
some fruit that was by my side without noticing me. I turned and stared
at her insolently with a besotted expression. She returned my gaze
haughtily--at least, so it appeared to me then. I have since learned
that she did not even see me; for, while making a great effort to
appear calm and to reply with an air of confidence to the offers of
hospitality, she was at heart very much disturbed by the unexpected
presence of so many strange men with their forbidding mien and rough
garb. However, she did not suspect anything. I overheard one of the
Mauprats near me saying to John:

“Good! It’s all right; she is falling into the trap. Let us make her
drink; then she will begin to talk.”

“One moment,” replied John; “watch her carefully; this is a serious
matter; there is something better to be had out of this than a little
passing pleasure. I am going to talk it over with the others; you will
be sent for to give your opinion. Meanwhile keep an eye on Bernard.”

“What is the matter?” I said abruptly, as I faced him. “Does not
this girl belong to me? Did not Antony swear it by the soul of my
grandfather?”

“Yes, confound it, that’s true,” said Antony, approaching our group,
whilst the other Mauprats surrounded the lady. “Listen, Bernard; I will
keep my word on one condition.”

“What is that?”

“It is quite simple: that you won’t within the next ten minutes tell
this wench that she is not at old Rochemaure’s.”

“What do you take me for?” I answered, pulling my hat over my eyes. “Do
you think that I am an idiot? Wait a minute; would you like me to go
and get my grandmother’s dress which is upstairs and pass myself off for
this same lady of Rochemaure?”

“A splendid idea!” replied Laurence.

“But before anything is done,” said John, “I want to speak to you all.”

And making signs to the others, he drew them out of the hall. Just as
they were going out I thought I noticed that John was trying to persuade
Antony to keep watch over me. But Antony, with a firmness which I could
not understand, insisted on following the rest. I was left alone with
the stranger.

For a moment I remained bewildered, almost stupefied, and more
embarrassed than pleased at the _tete-a-tete_. Then I endeavoured to
think of some explanation of these mysterious things that were happening
around me, and succeeded, as far as the fumes of the wine would allow
me, in imagining something fairly probable, though, indeed, remote
enough from the actual truth.

I thought I could account for everything I had just seen and heard by
supposing, first, that the lady, quiet and richly dressed though she
was, was one of those daughters of Bohemia that I had sometimes seen
at fairs; secondly, that Laurence, having met her in the country, had
brought her here to amuse the company; and, thirdly, that they had told
her of my condition of swaggering drunkenness, and had prevailed on her
to put my gallantry to the proof, whilst they were to watch me through
the keyhole. My first movement, as soon as these ideas had taken
possession of me, was to rise and go straight to the door. This I locked
with a double turn and then bolted. When I had done this I returned to
the lady, determined that I would not, at all events, give her cause to
laugh at my bashfulness.

She was sitting close to the fire, and as she was occupied in drying
her wet garments, leaning forward over the hearth, she had not taken
any notice of what I was doing; but when I approached her the strange
expression on my face caused her to start. I had made up my mind to kiss
her, as a beginning; but, I know not by what miracle, as soon as she
raised her eyes to mine, this familiarity became impossible. I only had
sufficient courage to say:

“Upon my word, mademoiselle, you are a charming creature, and I love
you--as true as my name is Bernard Mauprat.”

“Bernard Mauprat!” she cried, springing up; “you are Bernard Mauprat,
you? In that case, change your manner and learn to whom you are talking.
Have they not told you?”

“No one has told me, but I can guess,” I replied with a grin, while
trying hard to trample down the feeling of respect with which her sudden
pallor and imperious attitude inspired me.

“If you can guess,” she said, “how is it possible that you allow
yourself to speak to me in this way? But they were right when they said
you were ill-mannered; and yet I always had a wish to meet you.”

“Really!” I said, with the same hideous grin. “You! A princess of the
king’s highway, who have known so many men in your life? But let my
lips meet your own, my sweet, and you shall see if I am not as nicely
mannered as those uncles of mine whom you were listening to so willingly
just now.”

“Your uncles!” she cried, suddenly seizing her chair and placing it
between us as if from some instinct of self-defence. “Oh, mon Dieu! mon
Dieu! Then I am not at Madame de Rochemaure’s?”

“Our name certainly begins in the same way, and we come of as good a
rock as anybody.”

“Roche-Mauprat!” she muttered, trembling from head to foot, like a hind
when it hears the howl of wolves.

And her lips grew quite white. Her agony was manifest in every gesture.
From an involuntary feeling of sympathy I shuddered myself, and I was on
the point of changing my manner and language forthwith.

“What can there be in this to astound her so?” I asked myself. “Is she
not merely acting a part? And even if the Mauprats are not hidden behind
some wainscot listening to us, is she not sure to give them an account
of everything that takes place? And yet she is trembling like an aspen
leaf. But what if she is acting? I once saw an actress play Genevieve de
Brabant, and she wept so that one might have been deceived.”

I was in a state of great perplexity, and I cast harassed glances now at
her, now at the doors, which I fancied every moment would be thrown wide
open amid roars of laughter from my uncles.

This woman was beautiful as the day. I do not believe there has ever
lived a woman as lovely as she. It is not I alone who say so; she has
left a reputation for beauty which has not yet died out in her province.
She was rather tall, slender, and remarkable for the easy grace of her
movements. Her complexion was very fair, while her eyes were dark and
her hair like ebony. Her glance and her smile showed a union of goodness
and acuteness which it was almost impossible to conceive; it was as
if Heaven had given her two souls, one wholly of intellect, the other
wholly of feeling. She was naturally cheerful and brave--an angel,
indeed, whom the sorrows of humanity had not yet dared to touch. She
knew not what it was to suffer; she knew not what it was to distrust
and dread. This, indeed, was the first trial of her life, and it was I,
brute that I was, who made her undergo it. I took her for a gipsy, and
she was an angel of purity.

She was my young cousin (or aunt, after the Breton fashion), Edmee de
Mauprat, the daughter of M. Hubert, my great-uncle (again in the Breton
fashion), known as the Chevalier--he who had sought release from the
Order of Malta that he might marry, though already somewhat advanced
in years. My cousin was the same age as myself; at least, there was
a difference of only a few months between us. Both of us were now
seventeen, and this was our first interview. She whom I ought to have
protected at the peril of my life against the world was now standing
before me trembling and terror-stricken, like a victim before the
executioner.

She made a great effort, and approaching me as I walked about the hall
deep in thought, she explained who she was, adding:

“It is impossible that you can be an infamous creature like all these
brigands whom I have just seen, and of whose hideous life I have often
heard. You are young; your mother was good and wise. My father wanted to
adopt you and bring you up as his son. Even to-day he is still full of
grief at not being able to draw you out of the abyss in which you lie.
Have you not often received messages from him? Bernard, you and I are of
the same family; think of the ties of blood; why would you insult me? Do
they intend to assassinate me here or torture me? Why did they deceive
me by saying that I was at Rochemaure? Why did they withdraw in this
mysterious way? What are they preparing? What is going to happen?”

Her words were cut short by the report of a gun outside. A shot from the
culverin replied to it, and the alarm trumpet shook the gloomy walls of
the keep with its dismal note. Mademoiselle de Mauprat fell back into
her chair. I remained where I was, wondering whether this was some
new scene in the comedy they were enjoying at my expense. However,
I resolved not to let the alarm cause me any uneasiness until I had
certain proof that it was not a trick.

“Come, now,” I said, going up to her again, “own that all this is a
joke. You are not Mademoiselle de Mauprat at all; and you merely want to
discover if I am an apprentice capable of making love.”

“I swear by Christ,” she answered, taking my hands in her own, which
were cold as death, “that I am Edmee, your cousin, your prisoner--yes,
and your friend; for I have always felt an interest in you; I have
always implored my father not to cease his efforts for you. But listen,
Bernard; they are fighting, and fighting with guns! It must be my father
who has come to look for me, and they are going to kill him. Ah!” she
cried, falling on her knees before me, “go and prevent that, Bernard!
Tell your uncles to respect my father, the best of men, if you but knew!
Tell them that, if they hate our family, if they must have blood, they
may kill me! Let them tear my heart out; but let them respect my father
. . .”

Some one outside called me in a violent voice.

“Where is the coward? Where is that wretched boy?” shouted my Uncle
Laurence.

Then he shook the door; but I had fastened it so securely that it
resisted all his furious blows.

“That miserable cur is amusing himself by making love while our throats
are being cut! Bernard, the mounted police are attacking us! Your Uncle
Louis had just been killed! Come and help us! For God’s sake, come,
Bernard!”

“May the devil take the lot of you,” I cried, “and may you be killed
yourself, if I believe a single word of all this. I am not such a fool
as you imagine; the only cowards here are those who lie. Didn’t I swear
that the woman should be mine? I’m not going to give her up until I
choose.”

“To hell with you!” replied Laurence; “you are pretending . . .”

The shots rang out faster. Frightful cries were heard. Laurence left the
door and ran in the direction of the noise. His eagerness proved him
so much in earnest that I could no longer refuse to believe him. The
thought that they would accuse me of cowardice overcame me. I advanced
towards the door.

“O Bernard! O Monsieur de Mauprat!” cried Edmee, staggering after me;
“let me go with you. I will throw myself at your uncles’ feet; I will
make them stop the fight; I will give them all I possess, my life, if
they wish . . . if only they will spare my father.”

“Wait a moment,” I said, turning towards her; “I am by no means certain
that this is not a joke at my expense. I have a suspicion that my uncles
are there, behind that door, and that, while our whippers-in are firing
off guns in the courtyard, they are waiting with a blanket to toss me.
Now, either you are my cousin, or you are a . . . You must make me a
solemn promise, and I will make you one in return. If you are one of
these wandering charmers and I quit this room the dupe of your pretty
acting, you must swear to be my mistress, and to allow none other near
you until I have had my rights; otherwise, for my part, I swear that
you shall be chastised, even as my spotted dog Flora was chastised this
morning. If, on the other hand, you are Edmee, and I swear to intervene
between your father and those who would kill him, what promise will you
make me, what will you swear?”

“If you save my father,” she cried, “I swear to you that I will marry
you, I swear it.”

“Ho! ho! indeed!” I said, emboldened by her enthusiasm, the sublimity of
which I did not understand. “Give me a pledge, then, so that in any case
I do not go out from here like a fool.”

I took her in my arms and kissed her. She did not attempt to resist. Her
cheeks were like ice. Mechanically she began to follow me as I moved to
the door. I was obliged to push her back. I did so without roughness;
but she fell as one in a faint. I began to grasp the gravity of my
position; for there was nobody in the corridor and the tumult outside
was becoming more and more alarming. I was about to run and get my
weapons, when a last feeling of distrust, or it may have been another
sentiment, prompted me to go back and double-lock the door of the hall
where I was leaving Edmee. I put the key into my belt and hastened to
the ramparts, armed with a gun, which I loaded as I ran.

It was simply an attack made by the mounted police, and had nothing
whatever to do with Mademoiselle de Mauprat. A little while before our
creditors had obtained a writ of arrest against us. The law officers,
beaten and otherwise severely handled, had demanded of the King’s
advocate at the provincial court of Bourges another warrant of arrest.
This the armed police were now doing their best to execute. They had
hoped to effect an easy capture by means of a night surprise. But we
were in a better state of defence than they had anticipated. Our men
were brave and well armed; and then we were fighting for our very
existence; we had the courage of despair, and this was an immense
advantage. Our band amounted to twenty-four all told; theirs to more
than fifty soldiers, in addition to a score or more of peasants, who
were slinging stones from the flanks. These, however, did more harm to
their allies than they did to us.

For half an hour the fighting was most desperate. At the end of this
time the enemy had become so dismayed by our resistance that they fell
back, and hostilities were suspended. However, they soon returned to the
attack, and again were repulsed with loss. Hostilities were once more
suspended. They then, for the third time, called upon us to surrender,
promising that our lives should be spared. Antony Mauprat replied with
an obscene jest. They remained undecided, but did not withdraw.

I had fought bravely; I had done what I called my duty. There was a long
lull. It was impossible to judge the distance of the enemy, and we
dared not fire at random into the darkness, for our ammunition was too
precious. All my uncles remained riveted on the ramparts, in case of
fresh attack. My Uncle Louis was dangerously wounded. Thoughts of my
prisoner returned to my mind. At the beginning of the fight I had heard
John Mauprat saying, that if our defeat seemed imminent, we must offer
to hand her over to the enemy, on condition that they should raise the
seige; that if they refused, we must hang her before their eyes. I
had no longer any doubts about the truth of what she had told me.
When victory appeared to declare for us they forgot the captive. But I
noticed the crafty John quitting the culverin which he so loved to
fire, and creeping away like a cat into the darkness. A feeling of
ungovernable jealousy seized me. I threw down my gun and dashed after
him, knife in hand, resolved, I believe, to stab him if he attempted to
touch what I considered my booty. I saw him approach the door, try to
open it, peer attentively through the keyhole, to assure himself that
his prey had not escaped him. Suddenly shots were heard again. He sprang
to his maimed feet with that marvellous agility of his, and limped off
to the ramparts. For myself, hidden as I was by the darkness, I let him
pass and did not follow. A passion other than the love of slaughter had
just taken possession of me. A flash of jealousy had fired my senses.
The smell of powder, the sight of blood, the noise, the danger, and the
many bumpers of brandy we had passed round to keep up our strength had
strangely heated my brain. I took the key from my belt and opened the
door noisily. And now, as I stood before my captive again, I was no
longer the suspicious and clumsy novice she had so easily moved to pity:
I was the wild outlaw of Roche-Mauprat, a hundred times more dangerous
than at first. She rushed towards me eagerly. I opened my arms to
catch her; instead of being frightened she threw herself into them,
exclaiming:

“Well! and my father?”

“Your father,” I said, kissing her, “is not there. At the present moment
there is no question either of him or of you. We have brought down a
dozen gendarmes, that is all. Victory, as usual, is declaring for us.
So, don’t trouble yourself any more about your father; and I, I won’t
trouble myself further about the King’s men. Let us live in peace and
rejoice in love.”

With these words I raised to my lips a goblet of wine which had been
left on the table. But she took it out of my hands with an air of
authority that made me all the bolder.

“Don’t drink any more,” she said; “think seriously of what you are
saying. Is what you tell me true? Will you answer for it on your honour,
on the soul of your mother?”

“Every word is true; I swear it by your pretty rosy lips,” I replied,
trying to kiss her again.

But she drew back in terror.

“Oh, mon Dieu!” she exclaimed, “he is drunk! Bernard! Bernard! remember
what you promised; do not break your word. You have not forgotten, have
you, that I am your kinswoman, your sister?”

“You are my mistress or my wife,” I answered, still pursuing her.

“You are a contemptible creature!” she rejoined, repulsing me with her
riding whip. “What have you done that I should be aught to you? Have you
helped my father?”

“I swore to help him; and I would have helped him if he had been there;
it is just the same, therefore, as if I really had. But, had he been
there, and had I tried to save him and failed, do you know that for
this treachery Roche-Mauprat could not have provided any instrument of
torture cruel enough and slow enough to drag the life out of me inch by
inch? For all I know, they may actually have heard my vow; I proclaimed
it loudly enough. But what do I care? I set little store by a couple of
days more or less of life. But I do set some store by your favour, my
beauty. I don’t want to be the languishing knight that every one laughs
at. Come, now, love me at once; or, my word, I will return to the fight,
and if I am killed, so much the worse for you. You will no longer have
a knight to help you, and you will still have seven Mauprats to keep at
bay. I’m afraid you are not strong enough for that rough work, my pretty
little love-bird.”

These words, which I threw out at random, merely to distract her
attention so that I might seize her hands or her waist, made a deep
impression on her. She fled to the other end of the hall, and tried
to force open the window; but her little hands could not even move the
heavy leaden sash in the rusty ironwork. Her efforts made me laugh. She
clasped her hands in terror, and remained motionless. Then all at once
the expression of her face changed. She seemed to have resolved how to
act, and came toward me smiling and with outstretched hand. So beautiful
was she thus that a mist came over my eyes and for a moment I saw her
not.

Ah, gentlemen, forgive my childishness. I must tell you how she was
dressed. After that weird night she never wore that costume again, and
yet I can remember it so exactly. It is a long, long time ago. But were
I to live as long as I have already lived again, I should not forget
a single detail, so much was I struck by it amid the tumult that
was raging within me and without; amid the din of shots striking
the ramparts, the lightning flashes ripping the sky, and the violent
palpitations which sent my blood surging from my heart to my brain, and
from my head to my breast.

Oh, how lovely she was! It seems as if her shade were even now
passing before my eyes. Yes; I fancy I see her in the same dress, the
riding-habit which used to be worn in those days. The skirt of it was of
cloth and very full; round the waist was a red sash, while a waistcoat
of pearl-gray satin, fastened with buttons, fitted closely to the
figure; over this was a hunting-jacket, trimmed with lace, short and
open in front; the hat, of gray felt, with a broad brim turned up in
front, was crowned with half a dozen red feathers. The hair, which was
not powdered, was drawn back from the face and fell down in two long
plaits, like those of the Bernese women. Edmee’s were so long that they
almost reached the ground.

Her garb, to me so strangely fascinating, her youth and beauty, and the
favour with which she now seemed to regard my pretensions, combined to
make me mad with love and joy. I could imagine nothing more beautiful
than a lovely woman yielding without coarse words, and without tears of
shame. My first impulse was to take her in my arms; but, as if overcome
by that irresistible longing to worship which characterizes a first
love, even with the grossest of beings, I fell down before her and
pressed her knees to my breast; and yet, on my own supposition, it was
to a shameless wanton that this homage was paid. I was none the less
nigh to swooning from bliss.

She took my head between her two beautiful hands, and exclaimed:

“Ah, I was right! I knew quite well that you were not one of those
reprobates. You are going to save me, aren’t you? Thank God! How I
thank you, O God! Must we jump from the window? Oh, I am not afraid;
come--come!”

I seemed as if awakened from a dream, and, I confess, the awakening was
not a little painful.

“What does this mean?” I asked, as I rose to my feet. “Are you still
jesting with me? Do you not know where you are? Do you think that I am a
child?”

“I know that I am at Roche-Mauprat,” she replied, turning pale again,
“and that I shall be outraged and assassinated in a couple of hours, if
meanwhile I do not succeed in inspiring you with some pity. But I shall
succeed,” she cried, falling at my feet in her turn; “you are not one of
those men. You are too young to be a monster like them. I could see from
your eyes that you pitied me. You will help me to escape, won’t you,
won’t you, my dear heart?”

She took my hands and kissed them frenziedly, in the hope of moving me.
I listened and looked at her with a sullen stupidity scarcely calculated
to reassure her. My heart was naturally but little accessible to
feelings of generosity and compassion, and at this moment a passion
stronger than all the rest was keeping down the impulse she had striven
to arouse. I devoured her with my eyes, and made no effort to understand
her words. I only wished to discover whether I was pleasing to her, or
whether she was trying to make use of me to effect her escape.

“I see that you are afraid,” I said. “You are wrong to be afraid of
me. I shall certainly not do you any harm. You are too pretty for me to
think of anything but of caressing you.”

“Yes; but your uncles will kill me,” she cried; “you know they will.
Surely you would not have me killed? Since you love me, save me; I will
love you afterwards.”

“Oh, yes; afterwards, afterwards,” I answered, laughing with a silly,
unbelieving air; “after you have had me hanged by those gendarmes to
whom I have just given such a drubbing. Come, now; prove that you
love me at once; I will save you afterwards. You see, I can talk about
‘afterwards’ too.”

I pursued her round the room. Though she fled from me, she gave no signs
of anger, and still appealed to me with soft words. In me the poor girl
was husbanding her one hope, and was fearful of losing it. Ah, if I had
only been able to realize what such a woman as she was, and what my own
position meant! But I was unable then. I had but one fixed idea--the
idea which a wolf may have on a like occasion.

At last, as my only answer to all her entreaties was, “Do you love me,
or are you fooling me?” she saw what a brute she had to deal with, and,
making up her mind accordingly, she came towards me, threw her arms
round my neck, hid her face in my bosom, and let me kiss her hair. Then
she put me gently from her, saying:

“Ah, mon Dieu! don’t you see how I love you--how I could not help loving
you from the very first moment I saw you? But don’t you understand that
I hate your uncles, and that I would be yours alone?”

“Yes,” I replied, obstinately, “because you say to yourself: ‘This is a
booby whom I shall persuade to do anything I wish, by telling him that
I love him; he will believe it, and I will take him away to be hanged.’
Come; there is only one word which will serve if you love me.”

She looked at me with an agonized air. I sought to press my lips to hers
whenever her head was not turned away. I held her hands in mine. She was
powerless now to do more than delay the hour of her defeat. Suddenly
the colour rushed back to the pale face; she began to smile; and with an
expression of angelic coquetry, she asked:

“And you--do you love me?”

From this moment the victory was hers. I no longer had power to will
what I wished. The lynx in me was subdued; the man rose in its place;
and I believe that my voice had a human ring, as I cried for the first
time in my life:

“Yes, I love you! Yes, I love you!”

“Well, then,” she said, distractedly, and in a caressing tone, “let us
love each other and escape together.”

“Yes, let us escape,” I answered. “I loathe this house, and I loathe my
uncles. I have long wanted to escape. And yet I shall only be hanged,
you know.”

“They won’t hang you,” she rejoined with a laugh; “my betrothed is a
lieutenant-general.”

“Your betrothed!” I cried, in a fresh fit of jealousy more violent than
the first. “You are going to be married?”

“And why not?” she replied, watching me attentively.

I turned pale and clinched my teeth.

“In that case, . . .” I said, trying to carry her off in my arms.

“In that case,” she answered, giving me a little tap on the cheek, “I
see that you are jealous; but his must be a particular jealousy who at
ten o’clock yearns for his mistress, only to hand her over at midnight
to eight drunken men who will return her to him on the morrow as foul as
the mud on the roads.”

“Ah, you are right!” I exclaimed. “Go, then; go. I would defend you to
the last drop of my blood; but I should be vanquished by numbers, and I
should die with the knowledge that you were left to them. How horrible!
I shudder to think of it. Come--you must go.”

“Yes! yes, my angel!” she cried, kissing me passionately on the cheek.

These caresses, the first a woman had given me since my childhood,
recalled, I know not how or why, my mother’s last kiss, and, instead of
pleasure, caused me profound sadness. I felt my eyes filling with tears.
Noticing this, she kissed my tears, repeating the while:

“Save me! Save me!”

“And your marriage?” I asked. “Oh! listen. Swear that you will not marry
before I die. You will not have to wait long; for my uncles administer
sound justice and swift, as they say.”

“You are not going to follow me, then?” she asked.

“Follow you? No; it is as well to be hanged here for helping you to
escape as to be hanged yonder for being a bandit. Here, at least, I
avoid a twofold shame: I shall not be accounted an informer, and shall
not be hanged in a public place.”

“I will not leave you here,” she cried, “though I die myself. Fly with
me. You run no risk, believe me. Before God, I declare you are safe.
Kill me, if I lie. But let us start--quickly. O God! I hear them
singing. They are coming this way. Ah, if you will not defend me, kill
me at once!”

She threw herself into my arms. Love and jealousy were gradually
overpowering me. Indeed, I even thought seriously of killing her; and I
kept my hand on my hunting-knife as long as I heard any noise or voices
near the hall. They were exulting in their victory. I cursed Heaven for
not giving it to our foes. I clasped Edmee to my breast, and we remained
motionless in each other’s arms, until a fresh report announced that the
fight was beginning again. Then I pressed her passionately to my heart.

“You remind me,” I said, “of a poor little dove which one day flew into
my jacket to escape from a kite, and tried to hide itself in my bosom.”

“And you did not give it up to the kite, did you?” asked Edmee.

“No, by all the devils! not any more than I shall give you up, you, the
prettiest of all the birds in the woods, to these vile night-birds that
are threatening you.”

“But how shall we escape?” she cried, terror-stricken by the volleys
they were firing.

“Easily,” I said. “Follow me.”

I seized a torch, and lifting a trap-door, I made her descend with me to
the cellar. Thence we passed into a subterranean passage hollowed out
of the rock. This, in bygone days had enabled the garrison, then more
numerous, to venture upon an important move in case of an attack; some
of the besieged would emerge into the open country on the side opposite
the portcullis and fall on the rear of the besiegers, who were thus
caught between two fires. But many years had passed since the garrison
of Roche-Mauprat was large enough to be divided into two bodies; and
besides, during the night it would have been folly to venture beyond the
walls. We arrived, therefore, at the exit of the passage without meeting
with any obstacle. But at the last moment I was seized with a fit of
madness. I threw down my torch, and leaned against the door.

“You shall not go out from here,” I said to the trembling Edmee,
“without promising to be mine.”

We were in darkness; the noise of the fight no longer reached us. Before
any one could surprise us here we had ample time to escape. Everything
was in my favour. Edmee was now at the mercy of my caprice. When she saw
that the seductions of her beauty could no longer rouse me to ecstasy,
she ceased to implore, and drew backward a few steps.

“Open the door,” she said, “and go out first, or I will kill myself.
See, I have your hunting-knife. You left it by the side of the
trap-door. To return to your uncles you will have to walk through my
blood.”

Her resolute manner frightened me.

“Give me that knife,” I said, “or, be the consequences what they may, I
will take it from you by force.”

“Do you think I am afraid to die?” she said calmly. “If this knife had
only been in my hand yonder in the chateau, I should not have humbled
myself before you.”

“Confound it!” I cried, “you have deceived me. Your love is a sham.
Begone! I despise you. I will not follow such as you.”

At the same time I opened the door.

“I would not go without you,” she cried; “and you--you would not have me
go without dishonour. Which of us is the more generous?”

“You are mad,” I said. “You have lied to me; and you do not know what to
do to make a fool of me. However, you shall not go out from here without
swearing that your marriage with the lieutenant-general or any other man
shall not take place before you have been my mistress.”

“Your mistress!” she said. “Are you dreaming? Could you not at least
soften the insult by saying your wife?”

“That is what any one of my uncles would say in my place; because they
would care only about your dowry. But I--I yearn for nothing but your
beauty. Swear, then, that you will be mine first; afterwards you shall
be free, on my honour. And if my jealousy prove so fierce that it may
not be borne, well, since a man may not go from his word, I will blow my
brains out.”

“I swear,” said Edmee, “to be no man’s before being yours.”

“That is not it. Swear to be mine before being any other’s.”

“It is the same thing,” she answered. “Yes; I swear it.”

“On the gospel? On the name of Christ? By the salvation of your soul? By
the memory of your mother?”

“On the gospel; in the name of Christ; by the salvation of my soul; by
the memory of my mother.”

“Good.”

“One moment,” she rejoined; “I want you to swear that my promise and its
fulfilment shall remain a secret; that my father shall never know it, or
any person who might tell him.”

“No one in the world shall hear it from me. Why should I want others to
know, provided only that you keep your word?”

She made me repeat the formula of an oath. Then we hurried forth into
the open, holding each other’s hands as a sign of mutual trust.

But now our flight became dangerous. Edmee feared the besiegers almost
as much as the besieged. We were fortunate enough not to meet any.
Still, it was by no means easy to move quickly. The night was so dark
that we were continually running against trees, and the ground was so
slippery that we were unable to avoid falls. A sudden noise made
us start; but, from the rattle of the chain fixed on its foot,
I immediately recognised my grandfather’s horse, an animal of an
extraordinary age, but still strong and spirited. It was the very horse
that had brought me to Roche-Mauprat ten years before. At present the
only thing that would serve as a bridle was the rope round its neck. I
passed this through its mouth, and I threw my jacket over the crupper
and helped my companion to mount; I undid the chain, sprang on the
animal’s back, and urging it on desperately, made it set off at a
gallop, happen what might. Luckily for us, it knew the paths better
than I, and, as if by instinct, followed their windings without knocking
against any trees. However, it frequently slipped, and in recovering
itself, gave us such jolts that we should have lost our seats a thousand
times (equipped as we were) had we not been hanging between life and
death. In such a strait desperate ventures are best, and God protects
those whom man pursues. We were congratulating ourselves on being out of
danger, when all at once the horse struck against a stump, and catching
his hoof in a root on the ground, fell down. Before we were up he had
made off into the darkness, and I could hear him galloping farther and
farther away. As we fell I had caught Edmee in my arms. She was unhurt.
My own ankle, however, was sprained so severely that it was impossible
for me to move a step. Edmee thought that my leg had been broken. I was
inclined to think so myself, so great was the pain; but soon I thought
no further either of my agony or my anxiety. Edmee’s tender solicitude
made me forget everything. It was in vain that I urged her to continue
her flight without me. I pointed out that she could now escape alone;
that we were some distance from the chateau; that day would soon
be breaking; that she would be certain to find some house, and that
everywhere the people would protect her against the Mauprats.

“I will not leave you,” she persisted in answering. “You have devoted
yourself to me; I will show the same devotion to you. We will both
escape, or we will die together.”

“I am not mistaken,” I cried; “it is a light that I see between the
branches. Edmee, there is a house yonder; go and knock at the door. You
need not feel anxious about leaving me here; and you will find a guide
to take you home.”

“Whatever happens,” she said, “I will not leave you; but I will try to
find some one to help you.”

“Yet, no,” I said, “I will not let you knock at that door alone. That
light, in the middle of the night, in a house situated in the heart of
the woods, may be a lure.”

I dragged myself as far as the door. It felt cold, as if of metal. The
walls were covered with ivy.

“Who is there?” cried some one within, before we had knocked.

“We are saved!” cried Edmee; “it is Patience’s voice.”

“We are lost!” I said; “he and I are mortal enemies.

“Fear nothing,” she said; “follow me. It was God that led us here.”

“Yes, it was God that led you here, daughter of Heaven, morning star!”
 said Patience, opening the door; “and whoever is with you is welcome too
at Gazeau Tower.”

We entered under a surbased vault, in the middle of which hung an iron
lamp. By the light of this dismal luminary and of a handful of brushwood
which was blazing on the hearth we saw, not without surprise, that
Gazeau Tower was exceptionally honoured with visitors. On one side the
light fell upon the pale and serious face of a man in clerical garb. On
the other, a broad-brimmed hat overshadowed a sort of olive-green cone
terminating in a scanty beard; and on the wall could be seen the shadow
of a nose so distinctly tapered that nothing in the world might compare
with it except, perhaps, a long rapier lying across the knees of the
personage in question, and a little dog’s face which, from its pointed
shape, might have been mistaken for that of a gigantic rat. In fact, it
seemed as if a mysterious harmony reigned between these three salient
points--the nose of Don Marcasse, his dog’s snout, and the blade of his
sword. He got up slowly and raised his hand to his hat. The Jansenist
cure did the same. The dog thrust its head forward between its master’s
legs, and, silent like him, showed its teeth and put back its ears
without barking.

“Quiet, Blaireau!” said Marcasse to it.




VII

No sooner had the cure recognised Edmee than he started back with an
exclamation of surprise. But this was nothing to the stupefaction of
Patience when he had examined my features by the light of the burning
brand that served him as torch.

“The lamb in the company of the wolf!” he cried. “What has happened,
then?”

“My friend,” replied Edmee, putting, to my infinite astonishment, her
little white hand into the sorcerer’s big rough palm, “welcome him as
you welcome me. I was a prisoner at Roche-Mauprat, and it was he who
rescued me.”

“May the sins of his fathers be forgiven him for this act!” said the
cure.

Patience took me by the arm, without saying anything, and led me nearer
the fire. They seated me on the only chair in the house, and the cure
took upon himself the task of attending to my leg, while Edmee gave an
account, up to a certain point, of our adventure. Then she asked for
information about the hunt and about her father. Patience, however,
could give her no news. He had heard the horn in the woods, and the
firing at the wolves had disturbed his tranquility several times during
the day. But since the storm broke over them the noise of the wind had
drowned all other sounds, and he knew nothing of what was taking place
in Varenne. Marcasse, meanwhile, had very nimbly climbed a ladder which
served as an approach to the upper stories of the house, now that the
staircase was broken. His dog followed him with marvellous skill.
Soon they came down again, and we learned that a red light could be
distinguished on the horizon in the direction of Roche-Mauprat. In spite
of the loathing I had for this place and its owners, I could not repress
a feeling very much like consternation on hearing that the hereditary
manor which bore my own name had apparently been taken and set on fire.
It meant disgrace, defeat; and this fire was as a seal of vassalage
affixed to my arms by those I called clodhoppers and serfs. I sprang up
from my chair, and had I not been held back by the violent pain in my
foot, I believe I should have rushed out.

“What is the matter?” said Edmee, who was by my side at the time.

“The matter is,” I answered abruptly, “that I must return yonder; for
it is my duty to get killed rather than let my uncles parley with the
rabble.”

“The rabble!” cried Patience, addressing me for the first time since I
arrived. “Who dares to talk of rabble here? I myself am of the rabble.
It is my title, and I shall know how to make it respected.”

“By Jove! Not by me,” I said, pushing away the cure, who had made me sit
down again.

“And yet it would not be for the first time,” replied Patience, with a
contemptuous smile.

“You remind me,” I answered, “that we two have some old accounts to
settle.”

And heedless of the frightful agony caused by my sprain, I rose again,
and with a backhander I sent Don Marcasse, who was endeavouring the play
the cure’s part of peacemaker, head over heels into the middle of the
ashes. I did not mean him any harm, but my movements were somewhat
rough, and the poor man was so frail that to my hand he was but as a
weasel would have been to his own. Patience was standing before me with
his arms crossed, in the attitude of a stoic philosopher, but the fire
was flashing in his eyes. Conscious of his position as my host, he was
evidently waiting until I struck the first blow before attempting
to crush me. I should not have kept him waiting long, had not Edmee,
scorning the danger of interfering with a madman, seized my arm and
said, in an authoritative tone:

“Sit down again, and be quiet; I command you.”

So much boldness and confidence surprised and pleased me at the same
time. The rights which she arrogated to herself over me were, in some
measure, a sanction of those I claimed to have over her.

“You are right,” I answered, sitting down.

And I added, with a glance at Patience:

“Some other time.”

“Amen,” he answered, shrugging his shoulders.

Marcasse had picked himself up with much composure, and shaking off the
ashes with which he was covered, instead of finding fault with me, he
tried, after his fashion to lecture Patience. This was in reality by no
means easy to do; yet nothing could have been less irritating than that
monosyllabic censure throwing out its little note in the thick of a
quarrel like an echo in a storm.

“At your age,” he said to his host; “not patient at all. Wholly to
blame--yes--wrong--you!”

“How naughty you are!” Edmee said to me, putting her hand on my
shoulder; “do not begin again, or I shall go away and leave you.”

I willingly let myself be scolded by her; nor did I realize that during
the last minutes we had exchanged parts. The moment we crossed the
threshold of Gazeau Tower she had given evidence of that superiority
over me which was really hers. This wild place, too, these strange
witnesses, this fierce host, had already furnished a taste of the
society into which I had entered, and whose fetters I was soon to feel.

“Come,” she said, turning to Patience, “we do not understand each other
here; and, for my part, I am devoured by anxiety about my poor father,
who is no doubt searching for me, and wringing his hands at this very
moment. My good Patience, do find me some means of rejoining him with
this unfortunate boy, whom I dare not leave to your care, since you have
not sufficient love for me to be patient and compassionate with him.”

“What do you say?” said Patience, putting his hand to his brow as if
waking from a dream. “Yes, you are right; I am an old brute, an old
fool. Daughter of God, tell this boy, this nobleman, that I ask his
pardon for the past, and that, for the present, my poor cell is at his
disposal. Is that well said?”

“Yes, Patience,” answered the cure. “Besides, everything may be managed.
My horse is quiet and steady, and Mademoiselle de Mauprat can ride it,
while you and Marcasse lead it by the bridle. For myself, I will remain
here with our invalid. I promise to take good care of him and not to
annoy him in any way. That will do, won’t it, Monsieur Bernard? You
don’t bear me any ill-will, and you may be very sure that I am not your
enemy.”

“I know nothing about it,” I answered; “it is as you please. Look after
my cousin; take her home safely. For my own part, I need nothing and
care for no one. A bundle of straw and a glass of wine, that is all I
should like, if it were possible to have them.”

“You shall have both,” said Marcasse, handing me his flask, “but first
of all here is something to cheer you up. I am going to the stable to
get the horse ready.”

“No, I will go myself,” said Patience; “you see to the wants of this
young man.”

And he passed into another lower hall, which served as a stable for
the cure’s horse during the visits which the good priest paid him. They
brought the animal through the room where we were; and Patience, after
arranging the cure’s cloak on the saddle, with fatherly care helped
Edmee to mount.

“One moment,” she said, before letting them lead her out. “Monsieur le
Cure, will you promise me on the salvation of your soul not to leave my
cousin before I return with my father to fetch him?”

“I promise solemnly,” replied the cure.

“And you, Bernard,” said Edmee, “will you give me your word of honour to
wait for me here?”

“I can’t say,” I answered; “that will depend on the length of your
absence and on my patience; but you know quite well, cousin, that we
shall meet again, even if it be in hell; and for my part, the sooner the
better.”

By the light of the brand which Patience was holding to examine the
horse’s harness, I saw her beautiful face flush and then turn pale. Then
she raised her eyes which had been lowered in sorrow, and looked at me
fixedly with a strange expression.

“Are we ready to start?” said Marcasse, opening the door.

“Yes, forward,” said Patience, taking the bridle. “Edmee, my child, take
care to bend down while passing under the door.”

“What is the matter, Blaireau?” said Marcasse, stopping on the threshold
and thrusting out the point of his sword, gloriously rusted by the blood
of the rodent tribe.

Blaireau did not stir, and if he had not been born dumb, as his master
said, he would have barked. But he gave warning as usual by a sort of
dry cough. This was his most emphatic sign of anger and uneasiness.

“There must be something down there,” said Marcasse; and he boldly
advanced into the darkness, after making a sign to the rider not to
follow. The report of firearms made us all start. Edmee jumped down
lightly from her horse, and I did not fail to notice that some impulse
at once prompted her to come and stand behind my chair. Patience rushed
out of the tower. The cure ran to the frightened horse, which was
rearing and backing toward us. Blaireau managed to bark. I forgot my
sprain, and in a single bound I was outside.

A man covered with wounds, and with the blood streaming from him, was
lying across the doorway. It was my Uncle Laurence. He had been mortally
wounded at the siege of Roche-Mauprat, and had come to die under our
eyes. With him was his brother Leonard, who had just fired his last
pistol shot at random, luckily without hitting any one. Patience’s
first impulse was to prepare to defend himself. On recognising Marcasse,
however, the fugitives, far from showing themselves hostile, asked for
shelter and help. As their situation was so desperate no one thought
that assistance should be refused. The police were pursuing them.
Roche-Mauprat was in flames; Louis and Peter had died fighting; Antony,
John, and Walter had fled in another direction, and, perhaps, were
already prisoners. No words would paint the horror of Laurence’s last
moments. His agony was brief but terrible. His blasphemy made the cure
turn pale. Scarce had the door been shut and the dying man laid on the
floor than the horrible death-rattle was heard. Leonard, who knew of no
remedy but brandy, snatched Marcasse’s flask out of my hand (not without
swearing and scornfully reproaching me for my flight), forced open his
brother’s clinched teeth with the blade of his hunting-knife, and,
in spite of our warning, poured half the flask down his throat. The
wretched man bounded into the air, brandished his arms in desperate
convulsions, drew himself up to his full height, and fell back stone
dead upon the blood-stained floor. There was no time to offer up a
prayer over the body, for the door resounded under the furious blows of
our assailants.

“Open in the King’s name!” cried several voices; “open to the police!”

“Help! help!” cried Leonard, seizing his knife and rushing towards the
door. “Peasants, prove yourselves nobles! And you, Bernard, atone for
your fault; wash out your shame; do not let a Mauprat fall into the
hands of the gendarmes alive!”

Urged on by native courage and by pride, I was about to follow his
example, when Patience rushed at him, and exerting his herculean
strength, threw him to the ground. Putting one knee on his chest, he
called to Marcasse to open the door. This was done before I could take
my uncle’s part against his terrible assailant. Six gendarmes at once
rushed into the tower and, with their guns pointed, bade us move at our
peril.

“Stay, gentlemen,” said Patience, “don’t harm any one. This is your
prisoner. Had I been alone with him, I should either have defended him
or helped him to escape; but there are honest people here who ought not
to suffer for a knave; and I did not wish to expose them to a fight.
Here is the Mauprat. Your duty, as you know, is to deliver him safe and
sound into the hands of justice. This other is dead.”

“Monsieur, surrender!” said the sergeant of the gendarmes, laying his
hand on Leonard.

“Never shall a Mauprat drag his name into the dock of a police court,”
 replied Leonard, with a sullen expression. “I surrender, but you will
get nothing but my skin.”

And he allowed himself to be placed in a chair without making any
resistance.

But while they were preparing to bind him he said to the cure:

“Do me one last kindness, Father. Give me what is left in the flask; I
am dying of thirst and exhaustion.”

The good cure handed him the flask, which he emptied at a draught. His
distorted face took on an expression of awful calm. He seemed absorbed,
stunned, incapable of resistance. But as soon as they were engaged
in binding his feet, he snatched a pistol from the belt of one of the
gendarmes and blew his brains out.

This frightful spectacle completely unnerved me. Sunk in a dull stupor,
no longer conscious of what was happening around me, I stood there as if
turned to stone, and it was only after some minutes that I realized
that I was the subject of a serious discussion between the police and
my hosts. One of the gendarmes declared that he recognised me as a
Hamstringer Mauprat. Patience declared that I was nothing but M. Hubert
de Mauprat’s gamekeeper, in charge of his daughter. Annoyed at the
discussion, I was about to make myself known when I saw a ghost rise
by my side. It was Edmee. She had taken refuge between the wall and the
cure’s poor frightened horse, which, with outstretched legs and eyes
of fire, made her a sort of rampart with its body. She was as pale as
death, and her lips were so compressed with horror that at first, in
spite of desperate efforts to speak, she was unable to express herself
otherwise than by signs. The sergeant, moved by her youth and her
painful situation, waited with deference until she could manage to make
herself understood. At last she persuaded them not to treat me as a
prisoner, but to take me with her to her father’s chateau, where she
gave her word of honour that satisfactory explanations and guarantees
would be furnished on my account. The cure and the other witnesses,
having pledged their words to this, we set out all together, Edmee
on the sergeant’s horse, he on an animal belonging to one of his men,
myself on the cure’s, Patience and the cure afoot between us, the police
on either side, and Marcasse in front, still impassive amid the general
terror and consternation. Two of the gendarmes remained behind to guard
the bodies and prepare a report.




VIII

We had travelled about a league through the woods. Wherever other paths
had crossed our own, we had stopped to call aloud; for Edmee, convinced
that her father would not return home without finding her, had implored
her companions to help her to rejoin him. To this shouting the gendarmes
had been very averse, as they were afraid of being discovered and
attacked by bodies of the fugitives from Roche-Mauprat. On our way they
informed us that this den had been captured at the third assault. Until
then the assailants had husbanded their forces. The officer in command
of the gendarmes was anxious to get possession of the keep without
destroying it; and, above all, to take the defenders alive. This,
however, was impossible on account of the desperate resistance they
made. The besiegers suffered so severely in their second attempt that
they found themselves compelled to adopt extreme measures or to retreat.
They therefore set the outer buildings on fire, and in the ensuing
assault put forth all their strength. Two Mauprats were killed while
fighting on the ruins of their bastion; the other five disappeared. Six
men were dispatched in pursuit of them in one direction, six in another.
Traces of the fugitives had been discovered immediately, and the men who
gave us these details had followed Laurence and Leonard so closely that
several of their shots had hit the former only a short distance from
Gazeau Tower. They had heard him cry that he was done for; and, as far
as they could see, Leonard had carried him to the sorcerer’s door. This
Leonard was the only one of my uncles who deserved any pity, for he was
the only one who might, perhaps, have been encouraged to a better kind
of life. At times there was a touch of chivalry in his brigandage,
and his savage heart was capable of affection. I was deeply moved,
therefore, by his tragic death, and let myself be carried along
mechanically, plunged in gloomy thoughts, and determined to end my days
in the same manner should I ever be condemned to the disgrace he had
scorned to endure.

All at once the sound of horns and the baying of hounds announced the
approach of a party of huntsmen. While we, on our side, were answering
with shouts, Patience ran to meet them. Edmee, longing to see her father
again, and forgetting all the horrors of this bloody night, whipped
up her horse and reached the hunters first. As soon as we came up with
them, I saw Edmee in the arms of a tall man with a venerable face. He
was richly dressed; his hunting-coat, with gold lace over all the seams,
and the magnificent Norman horse, which a groom was holding behind him,
so struck me that I thought I was in the presence of a prince. The signs
of love which he was showing his daughter were so new to me that I was
inclined to deem them exaggerated and unworthy of the dignity of a man.
At the same time they filled me with a sort of brute jealousy; for it
did not occur to my mind that a man so splendidly dressed could be
my uncle. Edmee was speaking to him in a low voice, but with great
animation. Their conversation lasted a few moments. At the end of it the
old man came and embraced me cordially. Everything about these manners
seemed so new to me, that I responded neither by word nor gesture to the
protestations and caresses of which I was the object. A tall young man,
with a handsome face, as elegantly dressed as M. Hubert, also came and
shook my hand and proffered thanks; why, I could not understand. He next
entered into a discussion with the gendarmes, and I gathered that he was
the lieutenant-general of the province, and that he was ordering them
to set me at liberty for the present, that I might accompany my uncle to
his chateau, where he undertook to be responsible for me. The gendarmes
then left us, for the chevalier and the lieutenant-general were
sufficiently well escorted by their own men not to fear attack from
any one. A fresh cause of astonishment for me was to see the chevalier
bestowing marks of warm friendship on Patience and Marcasse. As for the
cure, he was upon a footing of equality with these seigneurs. For some
months he had been chaplain at the chateau of Saint-Severe, having
previously been compelled to give up his living by the persecutions of
the diocesan clergy.

All this tenderness of which Edmee was the object, this family affection
so completely new to me, the genuinely cordial relations existing
between respectful plebeians and kindly patricians--everything that I
now saw and heard seemed like a dream. I looked on with a sensation that
it was all unintelligible to me. However, soon after our caravan started
my brain began to work; for I then saw the lieutenant-general (M. de
la Marche) thrust his horse between Edmee’s and my own, as if he had a
right to be next to her. I remembered her telling me at Roche-Mauprat
that he was her betrothed. Hatred and anger at once surged up within me,
and I know not what absurdity I should have committed, had not Edmee,
apparently divining the workings of my unruly soul, told him that she
wanted to speak to me, and thus restored me to my place by her side.

“What have you to say to me?” I asked with more eagerness than
politeness.

“Nothing,” she answered in an undertone. “I shall have much to say
later. Until then will you do everything I ask of you?”

“And why the devil should I do everything you ask of me, cousin?”

For a moment she hesitated to reply; then, making an effort, she said:

“Because it is thus that a man proves to a woman that he loves her.”

“Do you believe that I don’t love you?” I replied abruptly.

“How should I know?” she said.

This doubt astonished me very much, and I tried to combat it after my
fashion.

“Are you not beautiful?” I said; “and am not I a young man? Perhaps you
think I am too much of a boy to notice a woman’s beauty; but now that my
head is calm, and I am sad and quite serious, I can assure you that I am
even more deeply in love with you than I thought. The more I look at you
the more beautiful you seem. I did not think that a woman could be so
lovely. I tell you I shall not sleep till . . .”

“Hold your tongue,” she said sharply.

“Oh, I suppose you are afraid that man will hear me,” I answered,
pointing to M. de la Marche. “Have no fear; I know how to keep my word;
and, as you are the daughter of a noble house, I hope you know how to
keep yours.”

She did not reply. We had reached a part of the road where it was
only possible for two to walk abreast. The darkness was profound, and
although the chevalier and the lieutenant-general were at our heels, I
was going to make bold to put my arm round her waist, when she said to
me, in a sad and weary voice:

“Cousin, forgive me for not talking to you. I’m afraid I did not quite
understand what you said. I am so exhausted that I feel as if I were
going to die. Luckily, we have reached home now. Promise me that you
will love my father, that you will yield to all his wishes, that you
will decide nothing without consulting me. Promise me this if you would
have me believe in your friendship.”

“Oh, my friendship? you are welcome not to believe in that,” I answered;
“but you must believe in my love. I promise everything you wish. And
you, will you not promise me anything? Do, now, with a good grace.”

“What can I promise that is not yours?” she said in a serious tone. “You
saved my honour; my life belongs to you.”

The first glimmerings of dawn were now beginning to light the horizon.
We had reached the village of Saint-Severe, and soon afterward we
entered the courtyard of the chateau. On dismounting from her horse
Edmee fell into her father’s arms; she was as pale as death. M. de la
Marche uttered a cry, and helped to carry her away. She had fainted.
The cure took charge of me. I was very uneasy about my fate. The natural
distrust of the brigand sprang up again as soon as I ceased to be under
the spell of her who had managed to lure me from my den. I was like a
wounded wolf; I cast sullen glances about me, ready to rush at the first
being who should stir my suspicions by a doubtful word or deed. I was
taken into a splendid room, and a meal, prepared with a luxury far
beyond anything I could have conceived, was immediately served. The
cure displayed the kindest interest in me; and, having succeeded in
reassuring me a little, he went to attend to his friend Patience. The
disturbed state of my mind and my remnant of uneasiness were not
proof against the generous appetite of youth. Had it not been for the
respectful assiduity of a valet much better dressed than myself, who
stood behind my chair, and whose politeness I could not help returning
whenever he hastened to anticipate my wants, I should have made
a terrific breakfast; as it was, the green coat and silk breeches
embarrassed me considerably. It was much worse when, going down on his
knees, he set about taking off my boots preparatory to putting me to
bed. For the moment I thought he was playing a trick upon me, and came
very near giving him a good blow on the head; but his manner was so
serious as he went through this task that I sat and stared at him in
amazement.

At first, at finding myself in bed without arms, and with people
entering and leaving my room always on tip-toe, I again began to feel
suspicious. I took advantage of a moment when I was alone to get out of
bed and take from the table, which was only half cleared, the longest
knife I could find. Feeling easier in my mind, I returned to bed and
fell into a sound sleep, with the knife firmly clasped in my hand.

When I awoke again the rays of the setting sun, softened by my red
damask curtains, were falling on my beautifully fine sheets and lighting
up the golden pomegranates that adorned the corners of the bed. This bed
was so handsome and soft that I felt inclined to make it my apologies
for having slept in it. As I was about to get up I saw a kindly,
venerable face looking through the half-drawn curtains and smiling. It
was the Chevalier Hubert de Mauprat. He inquired anxiously about
the state of my health. I endeavoured to be polite and to express my
gratitude; but the language I used seemed so different from his that
I was disconcerted and pained at my awkwardness without being able to
realize why. To crown my misery, a movement that I made caused the
knife which I had taken as bedfellow to fall at M. de Mauprat’s feet. He
picked it up, looked at it, and then at myself with extreme surprise. I
turned as red as fire and stammered out I know not what. I expected he
would reprove me for this insult to his hospitality. However, he was too
polite to insist upon a more complete explanation. He quietly placed the
knife on the mantel-piece and, returning to me, spoke as follows:

“Bernard, I now know that I owe to you the life that I hold dearest in
the world. All my own life shall be devoted to giving you proofs of my
gratitude and esteem. My daughter also is sacredly indebted to you. You
need, then, have no anxiety about your future. I know what persecution
and vengeance you exposed yourself to in coming to us; but I know, too,
from what a frightful existence my friendship and devotion will be able
to deliver you. You are an orphan, and I have no son. Will you have me
for your father?”

I stared at the chevalier with wild eyes. I could not believe my ears.
All feeling within me seemed paralyzed by astonishment and timidity. I
was unable to answer a word. The chevalier himself evidently felt
some astonishment; he had not expected to find a nature so brutishly
ill-conditioned.

“Come,” he said; “I hope that you will grow accustomed to us. At all
events, shake hands, to show that you trust me. I will send up your
servant; give him your orders; he is at your disposal. I have only one
promise to exact from you, and that is that you will not go beyond the
walls of the park until I have taken steps to make you safe from the
pursuit of justice. At present it is possible that the charges which
have been hanging over your uncles’ heads might be made to fall on your
own.”

“My uncles!” I exclaimed, putting my hand to my brow. “Is this all a
hideous dream? Where are they? What has become of Roche-Mauprat?”

“Roche-Mauprat,” he answered, “has been saved from the flames. Only
a few of the outer buildings have been destroyed; but I undertake to
repair the house and to redeem your fief from the creditors who claim
it. As to your uncles . . . you are probably the sole heir of a name
that it behoves you to rehabilitate.”

“The sole heir?” I cried. “Four Mauprats fell last night; but the other
three . . .”

“The fifth, Walter, perished in his attempt to escape. His body was
discovered this morning in the pond of Les Froids. Neither John nor
Antony has been caught, but the horse belonging to one and a cloak of
the other’s, found near the spot where Walter’s body was lying, seem to
hint darkly that their fate was as his. Even if one of them manages to
escape, he will never dare make himself known again, for there would
be no hope for him. And since they have drawn down upon their heads
the inevitable storm, it is best, both for themselves and for us, who
unfortunately bear the same name, that they should have come to this
tragic end--better to have fallen weapon in hand, than to have suffered
an infamous death upon the gallows. Let us bow to what God has ordained
for them. It is a stern judgment; seven men in the pride of youth and
strength summoned in a single night to their terrible reckoning! . . .
We must pray for them, Bernard, and by dint of good works try to make
good the evil they have done, and remove the stains they have left on
our escutcheon.”

These concluding words summed up the chevalier’s whole character. He was
pious, just, and full of charity; but, with him, as with most nobles,
the precepts of Christian humility were wont to fall before the pride
of rank. He would gladly have had a poor man at his table, and on Good
Friday, indeed, he used to wash the feet of twelve beggars; but he was
none the less attached to all the prejudices of our caste. In trampling
under foot the dignity of man, my cousins, he considered, had,
as noblemen, been much more culpable than they would have been as
plebeians. On the latter hypothesis, according to him, their crimes
would not have been half so grave. For a long time I shared the
conviction myself; it was in my blood, if I may use the expression. I
lost it only in the stern lessons of my destiny.

He then confirmed what his daughter had told me. From my birth he had
earnestly desired to undertake my education. But his brother Tristan
had always stubbornly opposed this desire. There the chevalier’s brow
darkened.

“You do not know,” he said, “how baneful have been the consequences of
that simple wish of mine--baneful for me, and for you too. But that must
remain wrapped in mystery--a hideous mystery, the blood of the
Atridae. . . .”

He took my hand, and added, in a broken voice:

“Bernard, we are both of us victims of a vicious family. This is not
the moment to pile up charges against those who in this very hour are
standing before the terrible tribunal of God; but they have done me an
irreparable wrong--they have broken my heart. The wrong they have done
you shall be repaired--I swear it by the memory of your mother. They
have deprived you of education; they have made you a partner in their
brigandage; yet your soul has remained great and pure as was the soul of
the angel who gave you birth. You will correct the mistakes which others
made in your childhood; you will receive an education suitable to your
rank. And then, Bernard, you will restore the honour of your family. You
will, won’t you? Promise me this, Bernard. It is the one thing I long
for. I will throw myself at your knees if so I may win your confidence;
and I shall win it, for Providence has destined you to be my son. Ah,
once it was my dream that you should be more completely mine. If, when
I made my second petition, they had granted you to my loving care, you
would have been brought up with my daughter and you would certainly have
become her husband. But God would not have it so. You have now to begin
your education, whereas hers is almost finished. She is of an age to
marry; and, besides, her choice is already made. She loves M. de la
Marche; in fact, their marriage is soon to take place. Probably she had
told you.”

I stammered out a few confused words. The affection and generous ideas
of this noble man had moved me profoundly, and I was conscious of a new
nature, as it were, awakening within me. But when he pronounced the name
of his future son-in-law, all my savage instincts rose up again, and I
felt that no principle of social loyalty would make me renounce my claim
to her whom I regarded as my fairly won prize. I grew pale; I grew red;
I gasped for breath. Luckily, we were interrupted by the Abbe Aubert
(the Jansenist cure), who came to inquire how I was after my fall. Then
for the first time the chevalier heard of my accident; an incident that
had escaped him amid the press of so many more serious matters. He sent
for his doctor at once, and I was overwhelmed with kind attentions,
which seemed to me rather childish, but to which I submitted from a
sense of gratitude.

I had not dared to ask the chevalier for any news of his daughter. With
the abbe, however, I was bolder. He informed me that the length and
uneasiness of her sleep were causing some anxiety; and the doctor, when
he returned in the evening to dress my ankle, told me that she was very
feverish, and that he was afraid she was going to have some serious
illness.

For a few days, indeed, she was ill enough to cause anxiety. In the
terrible experience she had gone through she had displayed great energy;
but the reaction was correspondingly violent. For myself, I was also
kept to my bed. I could not take a step without feeling considerable
pain, and the doctor threatened that I should be laid up for several
months if I did not submit to inaction for a few days. As I was
otherwise in vigorous health, and had never been ill in my life, the
change from any active habits to this sluggish captivity caused me
indescribable _ennui_. Only those who have lived in the depths of woods,
and experienced all the hardships of a rough life, can understand the
kind of horror and despair I felt on finding myself shut up for more
than a week between four silk curtains. The luxuriousness of my room,
the gilding of my bed, the minute attentions of the lackeys, everything,
even to the excellence of the food--trifles which I had somewhat
appreciated the first day--became odious to me at the end of twenty-four
hours. The chevalier paid me affectionate but short visits; for he
was absorbed by the illness of his darling daughter. The abbe was all
kindness. To neither did I dare confess how wretched I felt; but when I
was alone I felt inclined to roar like a caged lion; and at night I had
dreams in which the moss in the woods, the curtain of forest trees, and
even the gloomy battlements of Roche-Mauprat, appeared to me like an
earthly paradise. At other times, the tragic scenes that had accompanied
and followed my escape were reproduced so vividly by my memory that,
even when awake, I was a prey to a sort of delirium.

A visit from M. de la Marche stirred my ideas to still wilder disorder.
He displayed the deepest interest in me, shook me by the hand again and
again, and implored my friendship, vowed a dozen times that he would lay
down his life for me, and made I don’t know how many other protestations
which I scarcely heard, for his voice was like a raging torrent in my
ears, and if I had had my hunting-knife I believe I should have thrown
myself upon him. My rough manners and sullen looks astonished him very
much; but, the abbe having explained that my mind was disturbed by
the terrible events which had happened in my family, he renewed his
protestations, and took leave of me in the most affectionate and
courteous manner.

This politeness which I found common to everybody, from the master
of the house to the meanest of his servants, though it struck me with
admiration, yet made me feel strangely ill at ease; for, even if it had
not been inspired by good-will towards me, I could never have brought
myself to understand that it might be something very different from real
goodness. It bore so little resemblance to the facetious braggadocio of
the Mauprats, that it seemed to me like an entirely new language, which
I understood but could not speak.

However, I recovered the power of speech when the abbe announced that
he was to have charge of my education, and began questioning me about
my attainments. My ignorance was so far beyond anything he could have
imagined that I was getting ashamed to lay it all bare; and, my savage
pride getting the upper hand, I declared that I was a gentleman, and had
no desire to become a clerk. His only answer was a burst of laughter,
which offended me greatly. He tapped me quickly on the shoulder, with
a good-natured smile, saying that I should change my mind in time, but
that I was certainly a funny fellow. I was purple with rage when the
chevalier entered. The abbe told him of our conversation and of my
little speech. M. Hubert suppressed a smile.

“My boy,” he said, in a kind tone, “I trust I may never do anything to
annoy you, even from affection. Let us talk no more about work to-day.
Before conceiving a taste for it you must first realize its necessity.
Since you have a noble heart you can not but have a sound mind; the
desire for knowledge will come to you of itself. And now to supper. I
expect you are hungry. Do you like wine?”

“Much better than Latin,” I replied.

“Come, abbe,” he continued laughingly, “as a punishment for having
played the pedant you must drink with us. Edmee is now quite out of
danger. The doctor has said that Bernard can get up and walk a few
steps. We will have supper served in this room.”

The supper and wine were so good, indeed, that I was not long in getting
tipsy, according to the Roche-Mauprat custom. I even saw they aided and
abetted, in order to make me talk, and show at once what species of boor
they had to deal with. My lack of education surpassed anything they had
anticipated; but I suppose they augured well from my native powers; for,
instead of giving me up, they laboured at the rough block with a zeal
which showed at least that they were not without hope. As soon as I was
able to leave my room I lost the feeling of _ennui_. The abbe was my
inseparable companion through the whole first day. The length of the
second was diminished by the hope they gave me of seeing Edmee on the
morrow, and by the kindness I experienced from every one. I began to
feel the charm of these gentle manners in proportion as I ceased to be
astonished at them. The never-failing goodness of the chevalier could
not but overcome my boorishness; nay, more, it rapidly won my heart.
This was the first affection of my life. It took up its abode in me side
by side with a violent love for his daughter, nor did I even dream of
pitting one of these feelings against the other. I was all yearning,
all instinct, all desire. I had the passions of a man in the soul of a
child.




IX

At last, one morning after breakfast, Mr. Hubert took me to see his
daughter. When the door of her room was opened I felt almost suffocated
by the warm-scented air which met me. The room itself was charming
in its simplicity; the curtains and coverings of chintz, with a white
ground. Large china vases filled with flowers exhaled a delicate
perfume. African birds were sporting in a gilded cage, and singing their
sweet little love songs. The carpet was softer to the feet than is
the moss of the woods in the month of March. I was in such a state of
agitation that my eyes grew more and more dim every moment. My feet
caught in one another most awkwardly, and I kept stumbling against the
furniture without being able to advance. Edmee was lying on a long white
chair, carelessly fingering a mother-of-pearl fan. She seemed to me
even more beautiful than before, yet so changed that a feeling of
apprehension chilled me in the middle of my ecstasy. She held out her
hand to me; I did not like to kiss it in the presence of her father. I
could not hear what she was saying to me--I believe her words were full
of affection. Then, as if overcome with fatigue, she let her head fall
back on the pillow and closed her eyes.

“I have some work to do,” said the chevalier to me. “Stay here with her;
but do not make her talk too much, for she is still very weak.”

This recommendation really seemed a sarcasm. Edmee was pretending to be
sleepy, perhaps to conceal some of the embarrassment that weighed on her
heart; and, as for myself, I felt so incapable of overcoming her reserve
that it was in reality a kindness to counsel silence.

The chevalier opened a door at one end of the room and closed it after
him; but, as I could hear him cough from time to time, I gathered
that his study was separated from his daughter’s room only by a wooden
partition. Still, it was bliss to be alone with her for a few moments,
as long as she appeared to be asleep. She did not see me, and I could
gaze on her at will. So pale was she that she seemed as white as her
muslin dressing-gown, or as her satin slippers with their trimming of
swan’s down. Her delicate, transparent hand was to my eyes like some
unknown jewel. Never before had I realized what a woman was; beauty for
me had hitherto meant youth and health, together with a sort of manly
hardihood. Edmee, in her riding-habit, as I first beheld her, had in
a measure displayed such beauty, and I had understood her better then.
Now, as I studied her afresh, my very ideas, which were beginning to
get a little light from without, all helped to make this second
_tete-a-tete_ very different from the first.

But the strange, uneasy pleasure I experienced in gazing on her was
disturbed by the arrival of a duenna, a certain Mademoiselle Leblanc,
who performed the duties of lady’s maid in Edmee’s private apartments,
and filled the post of companion in the drawing-room. Perhaps she had
received orders from her mistress not to leave us. Certain it is that
she took her place by the side of the invalid’s chair in such a way as
to present to my disappointed gaze her own long, meagre back, instead of
Edmee’s beautiful face. Then she took some work out of her pocket, and
quietly began to knit. Meanwhile the birds continued to warble, the
chevalier to cough, Edmee to sleep or to pretend to sleep, while I
remained at the other end of the room with my head bent over the prints
in a book that I was holding upside down.

After some time I became aware that Edmee was not asleep, and that she
was talking to her attendant in a low voice. I fancied I noticed the
latter glancing at me from time to time out of the corner of her eye in
a somewhat stealthy manner. To escape the ordeal of such an examination,
and also from an impulse of cunning, which was by no means foreign to my
nature, I let my head fall on the book, and the book on the pier-table,
and in this posture I remained as if buried in sleep or thought. Then,
little by little, their voices grew louder, until I could hear what they
were saying about me.

“It’s all the same; you have certainly have chosen a funny sort of page,
mademoiselle.”

“A page, Leblanc! Why do you talk such nonsense? As if one had pages
nowadays! You are always imagining we are still in my grandmother’s
time. I tell you he is my father’s adopted son.”

“M. le Chevalier is undoubtedly quite right to adopt a son; but where on
earth did he fish up such a creature as that?”

I gave a side glance at them and saw that Edmee was laughing behind her
fan. She was enjoying the chatter of this old maid, who was supposed to
be a wag and allowed perfect freedom of speech. I was very much hurt to
see my cousin was making fun of me.

“He looks like a bear, a badger, a wolf, a kite, anything rather than
a man,” continued Leblanc. “What hands! what legs! And now he has been
cleaned up a little, he is nothing to what he was! You ought to have
seen him the day he arrived with his smock and his leather gaiters; it
was enough to take away one’s breath.”

“Do you think so?” answered Edmee. “For my part, I preferred him in his
poacher’s garb. It suited his face and figure better.”

“He looked like a bandit. You could not have looked at him properly,
mademoiselle.”

“Oh! yes, I did.”

The tone in which she pronounced these words, “Yes, I did,” made me
shudder; and somehow I again felt upon my lips the impress of the kiss
she had given me at Roche-Mauprat.

“It would not be so bad if his hair were dressed properly,” continued
the duenna; “but, so far, no one had been able to persuade him to have
it powdered. Saint-Jean told me that just as he was about to put the
powder puff to his head he got up in a rage and said, ‘Anything you like
except that confounded flour. I want to be able to move my head about
without coughing and sneezing.’ Heavens, what a savage!”

“Yet, in reality, he is quite right. If fashion did not sanction
the absurdity, everybody would perceive that it is both ugly and
inconvenient. Look and see if it is not more becoming to have long black
hair like his?”

“Long hair like that? What a mane. It is enough to frighten one.”

“Besides, boys do not have their hair powdered, and he is still a boy.”

“A boy? My stars! what a brat Boys? Why he would eat them for his
breakfast; he’s a regular ogre. But where does the hulking dog spring
from? I suppose M. le Chevalier brought him here from behind some
plough. What is his name again? . . . You did tell me his name, didn’t
you?”

“Yes, inquisitive; I told you he is called Bernard.”

“Bernard! And nothing else?”

“Nothing, for the present. What are you looking at?”

“He is sleeping like a dormouse. Look at the booby. I was wondering
whether he resembled M. le Chevalier. Perhaps it was a momentary
error--a fit of forgetfulness with some milk-maid.”

“Come, come, Leblanc; you are going too far . . .”

“Goodness gracious, mademoiselle, has not M. le Chevalier been young
like any other man? And that does not prevent virtue coming on with
years, does it?”

“Doubtless your own experience has shown you that this is possible. But
listen: don’t take upon yourself to make fun of this young man. It is
possible that you have guessed right; but my father requires him to be
treated as one of the family.”

“Well, well; that must be pleasant for you, mademoiselle. As for myself,
what does it matter to me? I have nothing to do with the gentleman.”

“Ah, if you were thirty years younger.”

“But did your father consult you, mademoiselle, before planting yon
great brigand in your room?”

“Why ask such a question? Is there anywhere in the world a better father
than mine?”

“But you are very good also. . . . There are many young ladies who would
have been by no means pleased.”

“And why, I should like to know? There is nothing disagreeable about the
fellow. When he has been polished a little . . .”

“He will always be perfectly ugly.”

“My dear Leblanc, he is far from ugly. You are too old; you are no
longer a judge of young men.”

Their conversation was interrupted by the chevalier, who came in to look
for a book.

“Mademoiselle Leblanc is here, is she?” he said in a very quiet tone.
“I thought you were alone with my son. Well, Edmee, have you had a talk
with him? Did you tell him that you would be his sister? Are you pleased
with her, Bernard?”

Such answers as I gave could compromise no one. As a rule, they
consisted of four or five incoherent words crippled by shame. M. de
Mauprat returned to his study, and I had sat down again, hoping that
my cousin was going to send away her duenna and talk to me. But they
exchanged a few words in a whisper; the duenna remained, and two mortal
hours passed without my daring to stir from my chair. I believe Edmee
really was asleep this time. When the bell rang for dinner her father
came in again to fetch me, and before leaving her room he said to her
again:

“Well, have you had a chat?”

“Yes, father, dear,” she replied, with an assurance that astounded me.

My cousin’s behaviour seemed to me to prove beyond doubt that she
had merely been trifling with me, and that she was not afraid of my
reproaches. And yet hope sprang up again when I remembered the strain in
which she had spoken of me to Mademoiselle Leblanc. I even succeeded in
persuading myself that she feared arousing her father’s suspicions, and
that she was now feigning complete indifference only to draw me the more
surely to her arms as soon as the favourable moment had arrived. As it
was impossible to ascertain the truth, I resigned myself to waiting. But
days and nights passed without any explanation being sent, or any secret
message bidding me be patient. She used to come down to the drawing-room
for an hour in the morning; in the evening she was present at dinner,
and then would play piquet or chess with her father. During all this
time she was so well watched that I could not exchange a glance with
her. For the rest of the day she remained in her own room--inaccessible.
Noticing that I was chafing at the species of captivity in which I was
compelled to live, the chevalier frequently said to me:

“Go and have a chat with Edmee. You can go to her room and tell her that
I sent you.”

But it was in vain that I knocked. No doubt they had heard me coming and
had recognised me by my heavy shuffling step. The door was never opened
to me. I grew desperate, furious.

Here I must interrupt the account of my personal impressions to tell you
what was happening at this time in the luckless Mauprat family. John and
Antony had really managed to escape, and though a very close search
had been made for them, they had not as yet been captured. All their
property was seized, and an order issued by the courts for the sale of
the Roche-Mauprat fief. As it proved, however, a sale was unnecessary.
M. Hubert de Mauprat put an end to the proceedings by coming forward
as purchaser. The creditors were paid off, and the title-deeds of
Roche-Mauprat passed into his hands.

The little garrison kept by the Mauprats, made up of adventurers of the
lowest type, had met the same fate as their masters. As I have already
said, the garrison had long been reduced to a few individuals. Two
or three of these were killed, others took to flight; one only was
captured. This man was tried and made to suffer for all. A serious
question arose as to whether judgment should not also be given against
John and Antony de Mauprat by default. There was apparently no doubt
that they had fled; the pond in which Walter’s body was found floating
had been drained, yet no traces of the bodies had been discovered. The
chevalier, however, for the sake of the name he bore, strove to prevent
the disgrace of an ignominious sentence; as if such a sentence could
have added aught to the horror of the name of Mauprat. He brought to
bear all M. de la Marche’s influence and his own (which was very real
in the province, especially on account of his high moral character),
to hush up the affair, and he succeeded. As for myself, though I had
certainly had a hand in more than one of my uncles’ robberies, there was
no thought of discussing me even at the bar of public opinion. In
the storm of anger that my uncles had aroused people were pleased to
consider me simply as a young captive, a victim of their cruelty, and
thoroughly well disposed towards everybody. Certainly, in his generous
good nature and desire to rehabilitate the family, the chevalier greatly
exaggerated my merits, and spread a report everywhere that I was an
angel of sweetness and intelligence.

On the day that M. Hubert became purchaser of the estate he entered
my room early in the morning accompanied by his daughter and the
abbe. Showing me the documents which bore witness to his sacrifice
(Roche-Mauprat was valued at about two hundred thousand francs), he
declared that I was forthwith going to be put in possession not only
of my share in the inheritance, which was by no means considerable, but
also of half the revenue of the property. At the same time, he said, the
whole estate, lands and produce, should be secured to me by his will
on one condition, namely, that I would consent to receive an education
suitable to my position.

The chevalier had made all these arrangements in the kindness of his
heart and without ostentation, partly out of gratitude for the service
he knew I had rendered Edmee, and partly from family pride; but he
had not expected that I should prove so stubborn on the question
of education. I cannot tell you the irritation I felt at this word
“condition”; especially as I thought I detected in it signs of some plan
that Edmee had formed to free herself from her promise to me.

“Uncle,” I answered, after listening to all his magnificent offers in
absolute silence, “I thank you for all you wish to do for me; but it is
not right that I should avail myself of your kindness. I have no need of
a fortune. A man like myself wants nothing but a little bread, a gun, a
hound, and the first inn he comes to on the edge of the wood. Since you
are good enough to act as my guardian pay me the income on my eighth of
the fief and do not ask me to learn that Latin bosh. A man of birth is
sufficiently well educated when he knows how to bring down a snipe and
sign his name. I have no desire to be seigneur of Roche-Mauprat; it is
enough to have been a slave there. You are most kind, and on my honour I
love you; but I have very little love for conditions. I have never done
anything from interested motives. I would rather remain an ignoramus
than develop a pretty wit for another’s dole. Moreover, I could never
consent to make such a hole in my cousin’s fortune; though I know
perfectly well that she would willingly sacrifice a part of her dowry to
obtain release from . . .”

Edmee, who until now had remained very pale and apparently heedless of
my words, all at once cast a lightning glance at me and said with an air
of unconcern:

“To obtain a release from what, may I ask, Bernard?”

I saw that, in spite of this show of courage, she was very much
perturbed; for she broke her fan while shutting it. I answered her
with a look in which the artless malice of the rustic must have been
apparent:

“To obtain release, cousin, from a certain promise you made me at
Roche-Mauprat.”

She grew paler than ever, and on her face I could see an expression of
terror, but ill-disguised by a smile of contempt.

“What was the promise you made him, Edmee?” asked the chevalier, turning
towards her ingenuously.

At the same time the abbe pressed my arm furtively, and I understood
that my cousin’s confessor was in possession of the secret.

I shrugged my shoulders; their fears did me an injustice, though they
roused my pity.

“She promised me,” I replied, with a smile, “that she would always look
upon me as a brother and a friend. Were not those your words, Edmee, and
do you think it is possible to make them good by mere money?”

She rose as if filled with new life, and, holding out her hand to me,
said in a voice full of emotion:

“You are right, Bernard; yours is a noble heart, and I should never
forgive myself if I doubted it for a moment.”

I caught sight of a tear on the edge of her eye-lid, and I pressed her
hand somewhat too roughly, no doubt, for she could not restrain a little
cry, followed, however, by a charming smile. The chevalier clasped me
to his breast, and the abbe rocked about in his chair and exclaimed
repeatedly:

“How beautiful! How noble! How very beautiful! Ah,” he added, “that is
something that cannot be learnt from books,” turning to the chevalier.
“God writes his words and breathes forth his spirit upon the hearts of
the young.”

“You will see,” said the chevalier, deeply moved, “that this Mauprat
will yet build up the honour of the family again. And now, my dear
Bernard, I will say no more about business. I know how I ought to act,
and you cannot prevent me from taking such steps as I shall think fit
to insure the rehabilitation of my name by yourself. The only true
rehabilitation is guaranteed by your noble sentiments; but there is
still another which I know you will not refuse to attempt--the way
to this lies through your talents and intelligence. You will make the
effort out of love for us, I hope. However, we need not talk of this
at present. I respect your proud spirit, and I gladly renew my offers
without conditions. And now, abbe, I shall be glad if you will accompany
me to the town to see my lawyer. The carriage is waiting. As for you,
children, you can have lunch together. Come, Bernard, offer your arm to
your cousin, or rather, to your sister. You must acquire some courtesy
of manner, since in her case it will be but the expression of your
heart.”

“That is true, uncle,” I answered, taking hold of Edmee’s arm somewhat
roughly to lead her downstairs.

I could feel her trembling; but the pink had returned to her cheeks, and
a smile of affection was playing about her lips.

As soon as we were seated opposite each other at table our happy harmony
was chilled in a very few moments. We both returned to our former
state of embarrassment. Had we been alone I should have got out of the
difficulty by one of those abrupt sallies which I knew how to force from
myself when I grew too much ashamed of my bashfulness; but the presence
of Saint-Jean, who was waiting upon us, condemned me to silence on the
subject next to my heart. I decided, therefore, to talk about Patience.
I asked her how it came to pass that she was on such good terms with
him, and in what light I ought to look upon the pretended sorcerer. She
gave me the main points in the history of the rustic philosopher, and
explained that it was the Abbe Aubert who had taken her to Gazeau Tower.
She had been much struck by the intelligence and wisdom of the stoic
hermit, and used to derive great pleasure from conversation with him. On
his side, Patience had conceived such a friendship for her that for some
time he had relaxed his strict habits, and would frequently pay her a
visit when he came to see the abbe.

As you may imagine, she had no little difficulty in making these
explanations intelligible to me. I was very much surprised at the
praise she bestowed on Patience, and at the sympathy she showed for
his revolutionary ideas. This was the first time I had heard a peasant
spoken of as a man. Besides, I had hitherto looked upon the sorcerer of
Gazeau Tower as very much below the ordinary peasant, and here was Edmee
praising him above most of the men she knew, and even siding with him
against the nobles. From this I drew the comfortable conclusion that
education was not so essential as the chevalier and the abbe would have
me believe.

“I can scarcely read any better than Patience,” I added, “and I only
wish you found as much pleasure in my society as in his; but it hardly
appears so, cousin, for since I came here . . .”

We were then leaving the table, and I was rejoicing at the prospect of
being alone with her at last, so that I might talk more freely, when on
going into the drawing-room we found M. de la Marche there. He had just
arrived, and was in the act of entering by the opposite door. In my
heart I wished him at the devil.

M. de la March was one of the fashionable young nobles of the day.
Smitten with the new philosophy, devoted to Voltaire, a great admirer of
Franklin, more well-meaning than intelligent, understanding the oracles
less than he desired or pretended to understand them; a pretty poor
logician, since he found his ideas much less excellent and his political
hopes much less sweet on the day that the French nation took it into its
head to realize them; for the rest, full of fine sentiments, believing
himself much more sanguine and romantic than he was in reality; rather
more faithful to the prejudices of caste and considerably more sensitive
to the opinion of the world than he flattered and prided himself on
being--such was the man. His face was certainly handsome, but I found it
excessively dull; for I had conceived the most ridiculous animosity for
him. His polished manners seemed to me abjectly servile with Edmee. I
should have blushed to imitate them, and yet my sole aim was to surpass
him in the little services he rendered her. We went out into the park.
This was very large, and through it ran the Indre, here merely a pretty
stream. During our walk he made himself agreeable in a thousand ways;
not a violet did he see but he must pluck it to offer to my cousin.
But, when we arrived at the banks of the stream, we found that the plank
which usually enabled one to cross at this particular spot had been
broken and washed away by the storms of a few days before. Without
asking permission, I immediately took Edmee in my arms, and quietly
walked through the stream. The water came up to my waist, but I carried
my cousin at arm’s length so securely and skilfully that she did not wet
a single ribbon. M. de la Marche, unwilling to appear more delicate than
myself, did not hesitate to wet his fine clothes and follow me, though
with some rather poor efforts the while to force a laugh. However,
though he had not any burden to carry, he several times stumbled over
the stones which covered the bed of the river, and rejoined us only with
great difficulty. Edmee was far from laughing. I believe that this proof
of my strength and daring, forced on her in spite of herself, terrified
her as an evidence of the love she had stirred in me. She even appeared
to be annoyed; and, as I set her down gently on the bank, said:

“Bernard, I must request you never to play such a prank again.”

“That is all very well,” I said; “you would not be angry if it were the
other fellow.”

“He would not think of doing such a thing,” she replied.

“I quite believe it,” I answered; “he would take very good care of that.
Just look at the chap. . . . And I--I did not ruffle a hair of your
head. He is very good at picking violets; but, take my word for it, in a
case of danger, don’t make him your first choice.”

M. de la Marche paid me great compliments on this exploit. I had hoped
that he would be jealous; he did not even appear to dream of it, but
rather made merry over the pitiable state of his toilet. The day was
excessively hot, and we were quite dry before the end of the walk.
Edmee, however, remained sad and pensive. It seemed to me that she was
making an effort to show me as much friendship as at luncheon. This
affected me considerably; for I was not only enamoured of her--I loved
her. I could not make the distinction then, but both feelings were in
me--passion and tenderness.

The chevalier and the abbe returned in time for dinner. They conversed
in a low voice with M. de la Marche about the settlement of my affairs,
and, from the few words which I could not help overhearing, I gathered
that they had just secured my future on the bright lines they had laid
before me in the morning. I was too shy and proud to express my simple
thanks. This generosity perplexed me; I could not understand it, and I
almost suspected that it was a trap they were preparing to separate me
from my cousin. I did not realize the advantage of a fortune. Mine were
not the wants of a civilized being; and the prejudices of rank were with
me a point of honour, and by no means a social vanity. Seeing that they
did not speak to me openly, I played the somewhat ungracious part of
feigning complete ignorance.

Edmee grew more and more melancholy. I noticed that her eyes rested now
on M. de la Marche, now on her father, with a vague uneasiness. Whenever
I spoke to her, or even raised my voice in addressing others, she would
start and then knit her brows slightly, as if my voice had caused her
physical pain. She retired immediately after dinner. Her father followed
her with evident anxiety.

“Have you not noticed,” said the abbe, turning to M. de la Marche, as
soon as they had left the room, “that Mademoiselle de Mauprat has very
much changed of late?”

“She has grown thinner,” answered the lieutenant-general; “but in my
opinion she is only the more beautiful for that.”

“Yes; but I fear she may be more seriously ill than she owns,” replied
the abbe. “Her temperament seems no less changed than her face; she has
grown quite sad.”

“Sad? Why, I don’t think I ever saw her so gay as she was this morning;
don’t you agree with me, Monsieur Bernard? It was only after our walk
that she complained of a slight headache.”

“I assure you that she is really sad,” rejoined the abbe. “Nowadays,
when she is gay, her gaiety is excessive; at such a time there seems to
be something strange and forced about her which is quite foreign to
her usual manner. Then the next minute she relapses into a state of
melancholy, which I never noticed before the famous night in the forest.
You may be certain that night was a terrible experience.”

“True, she was obliged to witness a frightful scene at Gazeau Tower,”
 said M. de la Marche; “and then she must have been very much exhausted
and frightened when her horse bolted from the field and galloped right
through the forest. Yet her pluck is so remarkable that . . . What do
you think, my dear Monsieur Bernard? When you met her in the forest, did
she seem very frightened?”

“In the forest?” I said. “I did not meet her in the forest at all.”

“No; it was in Varenne that you met her, wasn’t it?”

The abbe hastened to intervene. . . . “By-the-bye, Monsieur Bernard, can
you spare me a minute to talk over a little matter connected with your
property at . . .”

Hereupon he drew me out of the drawing-room, and said in a low voice:

“There is no question of business; I only want to beg of you not to let
a single soul, not even M. de la Marche, suspect that Mademoiselle de
Mauprat was at Roche-Mauprat for the fraction of a second.”

“And why?” I asked. “Was she not under my protection there? Did she
not leave it pure, thanks to me? Must it not be well known to the
neighbourhood that she passed two hours there?”

“At present no one knows,” he answered. “At the very moment she left it,
Roche-Mauprat fell before the attack of the police, and not one of its
inmates will return from the grave or from exile to proclaim the fact.
When you know the world better, you will understand how important it
is for the reputation of a young lady that none should have reason
to suppose that even a shadow of danger has fallen upon her honour.
Meanwhile, I implore you, in the name of her father, in the name of
the affection for her which you expressed this morning in so noble and
touching a manner . . .”

“You are very clever, Monsieur l’Abbe,” I said, interrupting him. “All
your words have a hidden meaning which I can grasp perfectly well,
clown as I am. Tell my cousin that she may set her mind at ease. I have
nothing to say against her virtue, that is very certain; and I trust
I am not capable of spoiling the marriage she desires. Tell her that I
claim but one thing of her, the fulfilment of that promise of friendship
which she made me at Roche-Mauprat.”

“In your eyes, then, that promise has a peculiar solemnity?” said the
abbe. “If so, what grounds for distrusting it have you?”

I looked at him fixedly, and as he appeared very much agitated, I took
a pleasure in keeping him on the rack, hoping that he would repeat my
words to Edmee.

“None,” I answered. “Only I observe that you are afraid that M. de
la Marche may break off the marriage, if he happens to hear of the
adventure at Roche-Mauprat. If the gentleman is capable of suspecting
Edmee, and of grossly insulting her on the eve of his wedding, it seems
to me that there is one very simple means of mending matters.”

“What would you suggest?”

“Why, to challenge him and kill him.”

“I trust you will do all you can to spare the venerable M. Hubert the
necessity of facing such a hideous danger.”

“I will spare him this and many others by taking upon myself to avenge
my cousin. In truth, this is my right, Monsieur l’Abbe. I know the
duties of a gentleman quite as well as if I had learnt Latin. You may
tell her this from me. Let her sleep in peace. I will keep silence, and
if that is useless I will fight.”

“But, Bernard,” replied the abbe in a gentle, insinuating tone, “have
you thought of your cousin’s affection for M. de la Marche?”

“All the more reason that I should fight him,” I cried, in a fit of
anger.

And I turned my back on him abruptly.

The abbe retailed the whole of our conversation to the penitent. The
part that the worthy priest had to play was very embarrassing. Under the
seal of confession he had been intrusted with a secret to which in his
conversations with me he could make only indirect allusions, to bring
me to understand that my pertinacity was a crime, and that the only
honourable course was to yield. He hoped too much of me. Virtue such as
this was beyond my power, and equally beyond my understanding.




X

A few days passed in apparent calm. Edmee said she was unwell, and
rarely quitted her room. M. de la Marche called nearly every day,
his chateau being only a short distance off. My dislike for him grew
stronger and stronger in spite of all the politeness he showed me.
I understood nothing whatever of his dabblings in philosophy, and I
opposed all his opinions with the grossest prejudices and expressions at
my command. What consoled me in a measure for my secret sufferings was
to see that he was no more admitted than myself to Edmee’s rooms.

For a week the sole event of note was that Patience took up his abode
in a hut near the chateau. Ever since the Abbe Aubert had found a refuge
from ecclesiastical persecution under the chevalier’s roof, he had no
longer been obliged to arrange secret meetings with the hermit. He had,
therefore, strongly urged him to give up his dwelling in the forest
and to come nearer to himself. Patience had needed a great deal of
persuasion. Long years of solitude had so attached him to his Gazeau
Tower that he hesitated to desert it for the society of his friend.
Besides, he declared that the abbe would assuredly be corrupted with
commerce with the great; that soon, unknown to himself, he would come
under the influence of the old ideas, and that his zeal for the sacred
cause would grow cold. It is true that Edmee had won Patience’s heart,
and that, in offering him a little cottage belonging to her father
situated in a picturesque ravine near the park gate, she had gone to
work with such grace and delicacy that not even his techy pride could
feel wounded. In fact, it was to conclude these important negotiations
that the abbe had betaken himself to Gazeau Tower with Marcasse on that
very evening when Edmee and myself sought shelter there. The terrible
scene which followed our arrival put an end to any irresolution still
left in Patience. Inclined to the Pythagorean doctrines, he had a horror
of all bloodshed. The death of a deer drew tears from him, as from
Shakespeare’s Jacques; still less could he bear to contemplate the
murder of a human being, and the instant that Gazeau Tower had served
as the scene of two tragic deaths, it stood defiled in his eyes, and
nothing could have induced him to pass another night there. He followed
us to Sainte-Severe, and soon allowed his philosophical scruples to be
overcome by Edmee’s persuasive powers. The little cottage which he was
prevailed on to accept was humble enough not to make him blush with
shame at a too palpable compromise with civilization; and, though the
solitude he found there was less perfect than at Gazeau Tower, the
frequent visits of the abbe and of Edmee could hardly have given him a
right to complain.


Here the narrator interrupted his story again to expatiate on the
development of Mademoiselle de Mauprat’s character.


Edmee, hidden away in her modest obscurity, was--and, believe me, I
do not speak from bias--one of the most perfect women to be found in
France. Had she desired or been compelled to make herself known to the
world, she would assuredly have been famous and extolled beyond all her
sex. But she found her happiness in her own family, and the sweetest
simplicity crowned her mental powers and lofty virtues. She was ignorant
of her worth, as I myself was at that time, when, brutelike, I saw only
with the eyes of the body, and believed I loved her only because she was
beautiful. It should be said, too, that her _fiance_, M. de la Marche,
understood her but little better. He had developed the weakly mind with
which he was endowed in the frigid school of Voltaire and Helvetius.
Edmee had fired her vast intellect with the burning declamations of Jean
Jacques. A day came when I could understand her--the day when M. de la
Marche could have understood her would never have come.

Edmee, deprived of her mother from the very cradle, and left to her
young devices by a father full of confidence and careless good nature,
had shaped her character almost alone. The Abbe Aubert, who had
confirmed her, had by no means forbidden her to read the philosophers by
whom he himself had been lured from the paths of orthodoxy. Finding no
one to oppose her ideas or even to discuss them--for her father, who
idolized her, allowed himself to be led wherever she wished--Edmee
had drawn support from two sources apparently very antagonistic:
the philosophy which was preparing the downfall of Christianity, and
Christianity which was proscribing the spirit of inquiry. To account
for this contradiction, you must recall what I told you about the
effect produced on the Abbe Aubert by the _Profession de Foi du Vicaire
Savoyard_. Moreover, you must be aware that, in poetic souls, mysticism
and doubt often reign side by side. Jean Jacques himself furnishes a
striking example of this, and you know what sympathies he stirred among
priests and nobles, even when he was chastising them so unmercifully.
What miracles may not conviction work when helped by sublime eloquence!
Edmee had drunk of this living fount with all the eagerness of an ardent
soul. In her rare visits to Paris she had sought for spirits in sympathy
with her own. There, however, she had found so many shades of opinion,
so little harmony, and--despite the prevailing fashion--so many
ineradicable prejudices, that she had returned with a yet deeper love to
her solitude and her poetic reveries under the old oaks in the park. She
would even then speak of her illusions, and--with a good sense beyond
her years, perhaps, too, beyond her sex--she refused all opportunities
of direct intercourse with the philosophers whose writings made up her
intellectual life.

“I am somewhat of a Sybarite,” she would say with a smile. “I would
rather have a bouquet of roses arranged for me in a vase in the early
morning, than go and gather them myself from out their thorns in the
heat of the sun.”

As a fact, this remark about her sybaritism was only a jest. Brought up
in the country, she was strong, active, brave, and full of life. To
all her charms of delicate beauty she united the energy of physical and
moral health. She was the proud-spirited and fearless girl, no less than
the sweet and affable mistress of the house. I often found her haughty
and disdainful. Patience and the poor of the district never found her
anything but modest and good-natured.

Edmee loved the poets almost as much as the transcendental philosophers.
In her walks she always carried a book in her hand. One day when she had
taken Tasso with her she met Patience, who, as was his wont, inquired
minutely into both author and subject. Edmee thereupon had to give him
an account of the Crusades. This was not the most difficult part of her
task. Thanks to the stores of information derived from the abbe and to
his prodigious memory for facts, Patience had a passable knowledge of
the outlines of universal history. But what he had great trouble in
grasping was the connection and difference between epic poetry and
history. At first he was indignant at the inventions of the poets, and
declared that such impostures ought never to have been allowed. Then,
when he had realized that epic poetry, far from leading generations
into error, only raised heroic deeds to vaster proportions and a more
enduring glory, he asked how it was that all important events had not
been sung by the bards, and why the history of man had not been embodied
in a popular form capable of impressing itself on every mind without
the help of letters. He begged Edmee to explain to him a stanza of
_Jerusalem Delivered_. As he took a fancy to it, she read him a canto
in French. A few days later she read him another, and soon Patience knew
the whole poem. He rejoiced to hear that the heroic tale was popular in
Italy; and, bringing together his recollections of it, endeavoured
to give them an abridged form in rude prose, but he had no memory for
words. Roused by his vivid impressions, he would call up a thousand
mighty images before his eyes. He would give utterance to them in
improvisations wherein his genius triumphed over the uncouthness of his
language, but he could never repeat what he had once said. One would
have had to take it down from his dictation, and even that would have
been of no use to him; for, supposing he had managed to read it, his
memory, accustomed to occupy itself solely with thoughts, had never been
able to retain any fragment whatever in its precise words. And yet he
was fond of quoting, and at times his language was almost biblical.
Beyond, however, certain expressions that he loved, and a number of
short sentences that he found means to make his own, he remembered
nothing of the pages which had been read to him so often, and he always
listened to them again with the same emotion as at first. It was a
veritable pleasure to watch the effect of beautiful poetry on this
powerful intellect. Little by little the abbe, Edmee, and subsequently
I myself, managed to familiarize him with Homer and Dante. He was so
struck by the various incidents in the _Divine Comedy_ that he could
give an analysis of the poem from beginning to end, without forgetting
or misplacing the slightest detail in the journey, the encounters, and
the emotions of the poet. There, however, his power ended. If he essayed
to repeat some of the phrases which had so charmed him when they were
read, he flung forth a mass of metaphors and images which savoured of
delirium. This initiation into the wonders of poetry marked an epoch
in the life of Patience. In the realm of fancy it supplied the action
wanting to his real life. In his magic mirror he beheld gigantic combats
between heroes ten cubits high; he understood love, which he himself had
never known; he fought, he loved, he conquered; he enlightened nations,
gave peace to the world, redressed the wrongs of mankind, and raised
up temples to the mighty spirit of the universe. He saw in the starry
firmament all the gods of Olympus, the fathers of primitive humanity. In
the constellations he read the story of the golden age, and of the ages
of brass; in the winter wind he heard the songs of Morven, and in the
storm-clouds he bowed to the ghosts of Fingal and Comala.

“Before I knew the poets,” he said towards the end of his life, “I was
a man lacking in one of the senses. I could see plainly that this
sense was necessary, since there were so many things calling for its
operation. In my solitary walks at night I used to feel a strange
uneasiness; I used to wonder why I could not sleep; why I should find
such pleasure in gazing upon the stars that I could not tear myself from
their presence; why my heart should suddenly beat with joy on seeing
certain colours, or grow sad even to tears on hearing certain sounds.
At times I was so alarmed on comparing my continual agitation with the
indifference of other men of my class that I even began to imagine that
I was mad. But I soon consoled myself with the reflection that such
madness was sweet, and I would rather have ceased to exist than be cured
of it. Now that I know these things have been thought beautiful in all
times and by all intelligent beings, I understand what they are, and how
they are useful to man. I find joy in the thought that there is not a
flower, not a colour, not a breath of air, which has not absorbed the
minds and stirred the hearts of other men till it has received a name
sacred among all peoples. Since I have learnt that it is allowed to man,
without degrading his reason, to people the universe and interpret it by
his dreams, I live wholly in the contemplation of the universe; and
when the sight of the misery and crime in the world bruises my heart
and shakes my reason, I fall back upon my dreams. I say to myself that,
since all men are united in their love of the works of God, some day
they will also be united in their love of one another. I imagine that
education grows more and more perfect from father to son. It may be that
I am the first untutored man who has divined truths of which no glimpse
was given him from without. It may be, too, that many others before
myself have been perplexed by the workings of their hearts and brains
and have died without ever finding an answer to the riddle.” “Ah, we poor
folk,” added Patience, “we are never forbidden excess in labour, or in
wine, or in any of the debauches which may destroy our minds. There are
some people who pay dearly for the work of our arms, so that the poor,
in their eagerness to satisfy the wants of their families, may work
beyond their strength. There are taverns and other places more dangerous
still, from which, so it is said, the government draws a good profit;
and there are priests, too, who get up in their pulpits to tell us what
we owe to the lord of our village, but never what the lord owes to us.
Nowhere is there a school where they teach us our real rights; where
they show us how to distinguish our true and decent wants from the
shameful and fatal ones; where, in short, they tell us what we can and
ought to think about when we have borne the burden and heat of the day
for the profit of others, and are sitting in the evening at the door of
our huts, gazing on the red stars as they come out on the horizon.”

Thus would Patience reason; and, believe me, in translating his words
into our conventional language, I am robbing them of all their grace,
all their fire, and all their vigour. But who could repeat the exact
words of Patience? His was a language used by none but himself; it was a
mixture of the limited, though forcible, vocabulary of the peasants and
of the boldest metaphors of the poets, whose poetic turns he would often
make bolder still. To this mixed idiom his sympathetic mind gave order
and logic. An incredible wealth of thought made up for the brevity of
the phrases that clothed it. You should have seen how desperately his
will and convictions strove to overcome the impotence of his language;
any other than he would have failed to come out of the struggle with
honour. And I assure you that any one capable of something more serious
than laughing at his solecisms and audacities of phrase, would have
found in this man material for the most important studies on the
development of the human mind, and an incentive to the most tender
admiration for primitive moral beauty.

When, subsequently, I came to understand Patience thoroughly, I found a
bond of sympathy with him in my own exceptional destiny. Like him, I
had been without education; like him, I had sought outside myself for
an explanation of my being--just as one seeks the answer to a riddle.
Thanks to the accidents of my birth and fortune, I had arrived at
complete development, while Patience, to the hour of his death, remained
groping in the darkness of an ignorance from which he neither would nor
could emerge. To me, however, this was only an additional reason for
recognising the superiority of that powerful nature which held its
course more boldly by the feeble light of instinct, than I myself by all
the brilliant lights of knowledge; and which, moreover, had not had a
single evil inclination to subdue, while I had had all that a man may
have.

At the time, however, at which I must take up my story, Patience was
still, in my eyes, merely a grotesque character, an object of amusement
for Edmee, and of kindly compassion for the Abbe Aubert. When they spoke
to me about him in a serious tone, I no longer understood them, and I
imagined they took this subject as a sort of text whereon to build a
parable proving to me the advantages of education, the necessity of
devoting myself to study early in life, and the futility of regrets in
after years.

Yet this did not prevent me from prowling about the copses about his new
abode, for I had seen Edmee crossing the park in that direction, and I
hoped that if I took her by surprise as she was returning, I should get
a conversation with her. But she was always accompanied by the abbe,
and sometimes even by her father, and if she remained alone with the
old peasant, he would escort her to the chateau afterwards. Frequently
I have concealed myself in the foliage of a giant yew-tree, which spread
out its monstrous shoots and drooping branches to within a few yards of
the cottage, and have seen Edmee sitting at the door with a book in her
hand while Patience was listening with his arms folded and his head sunk
on his breast, as though he were overwhelmed by the effort of attention.
At that time I imagined that Edmee was trying to teach him to read, and
thought her mad to persist in attempting an impossible education. But
how beautiful she seemed in the light of the setting sun, beneath the
yellowing vine leaves that overhung the cottage door! I used to gaze on
her and tell myself that she belonged to me, and vow never to yield to
any force or persuasion which should endeavour to make me renounce my
claim.

For some days my agony of mind had been intense. My only method of
escaping from it had been to drink heavily at supper, so that I might be
almost stupefied at the hour, for me so painful and so galling, when she
would leave the drawing-room after kissing her father, giving her
hand to M. de la Marche, and saying as she passed by me, “Good-night,
Bernard,” in a tone which seemed to say, “To-day has ended like
yesterday, and to-morrow will end like to-day.”

In vain would I go and sit in the arm-chair nearest her door, so that
she could not pass without at least her dress brushing against me; this
was all I ever got from her. I would not put out my hand to beg her
own, for she might have given it with an air of unconcern, and I verily
believe I should have crushed it in my anger.

Thanks to my large libations at supper, I generally succeeded in
besotting myself, silently and sadly. I then used to sink into my
favourite arm-chair and remain there, sullen and drowsy, until the fumes
of the wine had passed away, and I could go and air my wild dreams and
sinister plans in the park.

None seemed to notice this gross habit of mine. They showed me such
kindness and indulgence in the family that they seemed afraid to express
disapproval, however much I deserved it. Nevertheless, they were well
aware of my shameful passion for wine, and the abbe informed Edmee of
it. One evening at supper she looked at me fixedly several times and
with a strange expression. I stared at her in return, hoping that
she would say something to provoke me, but we got no further than an
exchange of malevolent glances. On leaving the table she whispered to me
very quickly, and in an imperious tone:

“Break yourself of this drinking, and pay attention to what the abbe has
to say to you.”

This order and tone of authority, so far from filling me with hope,
seemed to me so revolting that all my timidity vanished in a moment. I
waited for the hour when she usually went up to her room and, going out
a little before her, took up my position on the stairs.

“Do you think,” I said to her when she appeared, “that I am the dupe of
your lies, and that I have not seen perfectly, during the month I have
been here, without your speaking a word to me, that you are merely
fooling me, as if I were a booby? You lied to me and now you despise me
because I was honest enough to believe your word.”

“Bernard,” she said, in a cold tone, “this is neither the time nor the
place for an explanation.”

“Oh, I know well enough,” I replied, “that, according to you, it will
never be the time or the place. But I shall manage to find both, do not
fear. You said that you loved me. You threw your arms about my neck
and said, as you kissed me--yes, here, I can still feel your lips on my
cheeks: ‘Save me, and I swear on the gospel, on my honour, by the memory
of my mother and your own, that I will be yours.’ I can see through it;
you said that because you were afraid that I should use my strength, and
now you avoid me because you are afraid I shall claim my right. But
you will gain nothing by it. I swear that you shall not trifle with me
long.”

“I will never be yours,” she replied, with a coldness which was becoming
more and more icy, “if you do not make some change in your language,
and manners, and feelings. In your present state I certainly do not fear
you. When you appeared to me good and generous, I might have yielded to
you, half from fear and half from affection. But from the moment I cease
to care for you, I also cease to be afraid of you. Improve your manners,
improve your mind, and we will see.”

“Very good,” I said, “that is a promise I can understand. I will act on
it, and if I cannot be happy, I will have my revenge.”

“Take your revenge as much as you please,” she said. “That will only
make me despise you.”

So saying, she drew from her bosom a piece of paper, and burnt it in the
flame of her candle.

“What are you doing?” I exclaimed.

“I am burning a letter I had written to you,” she answered. “I wanted
to make you listen to reason, but it is quite useless; one cannot reason
with brutes.”

“Give me that letter at once,” I cried, rushing at her to seize the
burning paper.

But she withdrew it quickly and, fearlessly extinguishing it in her
hand, threw the candle at my feet and fled in the darkness. I ran after
her, but in vain. She was in her room before I could get there, and
had slammed the door and drawn the bolts. I could hear the voice of
Mademoiselle Leblanc asking her young mistress the cause of her fright.

“It is nothing,” replied Edmee’s trembling voice, “nothing but a joke.”

I went into the garden, and strode up and down the walks at a furious
rate. My anger gave place to the most profound melancholy. Edmee, proud
and daring, seemed to me more desirable than ever. It is the nature of
all desire to be excited and nourished by opposition. I felt that I had
offended her, and that she did not love me, that perhaps she would never
love me; and, without abandoning my criminal resolution to make her mine
by force, I gave way to grief at the thought of her hatred of me. I
went and leaned upon a gloomy old wall which happened to be near, and,
burying my face in my hands, I broke into heart-rending sobs. My sturdy
breast heaved convulsively, but tears would not bring the relief I
longed for. I could have roared in my anguish, and I had to bite my
handkerchief to prevent myself from yielding to the temptation. The
weird noise of my stifled sobs attracted the attention of some one who
was praying in the little chapel on the other side of the wall which I
had chanced to lean against. A Gothic window, with its stone mullions
surmounted by a trefoil, was exactly on a level with my head.

“Who is there?” asked some one, and I could distinguish a pale face in
the slanting rays of the moon which was just rising.

It was Edmee. On recognising her I was about to move away, but she
passed her beautiful arm between the mullions, and held me back by the
collar of my jacket, saying:

“Why are you crying, Bernard?”

I yielded to her gentle violence, half ashamed at having betrayed my
weakness, and half enchanted at finding that Edmee was not unmoved by
it.

“What are you grieved at?” she continued. “What can draw such bitter
tears from you?”

“You despise me; you hate me; and you ask why I am in pain, why I am
angry!”

“It is anger, then, that makes you weep?” she said, drawing back her
arm.

“Yes; anger or something else,” I replied.

“But what else?” she asked.

“I can’t say; probably grief, as you suggest. The truth is my life here
is unbearable; my heart is breaking. I must leave you, Edmee, and go and
live in the middle of the woods. I cannot stay here any longer.”

“Why is life unbearable? Explain yourself, Bernard. Now is our
opportunity for an explanation.”

“Yes, with a wall between us. I can understand that you are not afraid
of me now.”

“And yet it seems to me that I am only showing an interest in you; and
was I not as affectionate an hour ago when there was no wall between
us?”

“I begin to see why you are fearless, Edmee; you always find some means
of avoiding people, or of winning them over with pretty words. Ah, they
were right when they told me that all women are false, and that I must
love none of them.”

“And who told you that? Your Uncle John, I suppose, or your Uncle
Walter; or was it your grandfather, Tristan?”

“You can jeer--jeer at me as much as you like. It is not my fault that
I was brought up by them. There were times, however, when they spoke the
truth.”

“Bernard, would you like me to tell you why they thought women false?”

“Yes, tell me.”

“Because they were brutes and tyrants to creatures weaker than
themselves. Whenever one makes one’s self feared one runs the risk of
being deceived. In your childhood, when John used to beat you, did you
never try to escape his brutal punishment by disguising your little
faults?”

“I did; that was my only resource.”

“You can understand, then, that deception is, if not the right, at least
the resource of the oppressed.”

“I understand that I love you, and in that at any rate there can be no
excuse for your deceiving me.”

“And who says that I have deceived you?”

“But you have; you said you loved me; you did not love me.”

“I loved you, because at a time when you were wavering between
detestable principles and the impulses of a generous heart I saw that
you were inclining towards justice and honesty. And I love you now,
because I see that you are triumphing over these vile principles, and
that your evil inspirations are followed by tears of honest regret. This
I say before God, with my hand on my heart, at a time when I can see
your real self. There are other times when you appear to me so below
yourself that I no longer recognise you and I think I no longer love
you. It rests with you, Bernard, to free me from all doubts, either
about you or myself.”

“And what must I do?”

“You must amend your bad habits, open your ears to good counsel and
your heart to the precepts of morality. You are a savage, Bernard; and,
believe me, it is neither your awkwardness in making a bow, nor your
inability to turn a compliment that shocks me. On the contrary, this
roughness of manner would be a very great charm in my eyes, if only
there were some great ideas and noble feelings beneath it. But your
ideas and your feelings are like your manners, that is what I cannot
endure. I know it is not your fault, and if I only saw you resolute
to improve I should love you as much for your defects as for your
qualities. Compassion brings affection in its train. But I do not love
evil, I never loved it; and, if you cultivate it in yourself instead of
uprooting it, I can never love you. Do you understand me?”

“No.”

“What, no!”

“No, I say. I am not aware that there is any evil in me. If you are not
displeased at the lack of grace in my legs, or the lack of whiteness in
my hands, or the lack of elegance in my words, I fail to see what you
find to hate in me. From my childhood I have had to listen to evil
precepts, but I have not accepted them. I have never considered it
permissible to do a bad deed; or, at least, I have never found it
pleasurable. If I have done wrong, it is because I have been forced to
do it. I have always detested my uncles and their ways. I do not like to
see others suffer; I do not rob a fellow-creature; I despise money, of
which they made a god at Roche-Mauprat; I know how to keep sober, and,
though I am fond of wine, I would drink water all my life if, like my
uncles, I had to shed blood to get a good supper. Yet I fought for them;
yet I drank with them. How could I do otherwise? But now, when I am my
own master, what harm am I doing? Does your abbe, who is always prating
of virtue, take me for a murderer or a thief? Come, Edmee, confess now;
you know well enough that I am an honest man; you do not really think
me wicked; but I am displeasing to you because I am not clever, and you
like M. de la Marche because he has a knack of making unmeaning speeches
which I should blush to utter.”

“And if, to be pleasing to me,” she said with a smile, after listening
most attentively, and without withdrawing her hand which I had taken
through the bars, “if, in order to be preferred to M. de la Marche, it
were necessary to acquire more wit, as you say, would you not try?”

“I don’t know,” I replied, after hesitating a moment; “perhaps I should
be fool enough; for the power you have over me is more than I can
understand; but it would be a sorry piece of cowardice and a great
folly.”

“Why, Bernard?”

“Because a woman who could love a man, not for his honest heart, but for
his pretty wit, would be hardly worth the pains I should have to take;
at least so it seems to me.”

She remained silent in her turn, and then said to me as she pressed my
hand:

“You have much more sense and wit than one might think. And since you
force me to be quite frank with you, I will own that, as you now are and
even should you never change, I have an esteem and an affection for
you which will last as long as my life. Rest assured of that, Bernard,
whatever I may say in a moment of anger. You know I have a quick
temper--that runs in the family. The blood of the Mauprats will never
flow as smoothly as other people’s. Have a care for my pride, then, you
know so well what pride is, and do not ever presume upon rights you
have acquired. Affection cannot be commanded; it must be implored or
inspired. Act so that I may always love you; never tell me that I am
forced to love you.”

“That is reasonable enough,” I answered; “but why do you sometimes speak
to me as if I were forced to obey you? Why, for instance, this evening
did you _forbid_ me to drink and _order_ me to study?”

“Because if one cannot command affection which does not exist, one can
at least command affection which does exist; and it is because I am sure
yours exists that I commanded it.”

“Good!” I cried, in a transport of joy; “I have a right then to order
yours also, since you have told me that it certainly exists. . . .
Edmee, I order you to kiss me.”

“Let go, Bernard!” she cried; “you are breaking my arm. Look, you have
scraped it against the bars.”

“Why have you intrenched yourself against me?” I said, putting my lips
to the little scratch I had made on her arm. “Ah, woe is me! Confound
the bars! Edmee, if you would only bend your head down I should be able
to kiss you . . . kiss you as my sister. Edmee, what are you afraid of?”

“My good Bernard,” she replied, “in the world in which I live one does
not kiss even a sister, and nowhere does one kiss in secret. I will kiss
you every day before my father, if you like; but never here.”

“You will never kiss me!” I cried, relapsing into my usual passion.
“What of your promise? What of my rights?”

“If we marry,” she said, in an embarrassed tone, “when you have received
the education I implore you to receive, . . .”

“Death of my life! Is this a jest? Is there any question of marriage
between us? None at all. I don’t want your fortune, as I have told you.”

“My fortune and yours are one,” she replied. “Bernard, between near
relations as we are, mine and thine are words without meaning. I should
never suspect you of being mercenary. I know that you love me, that you
will work to give me proof of this, and that a day will come when your
love will no longer make me fear, because I shall be able to accept it
in the face of heaven and earth.”

“If that is your idea,” I replied, completely drawn away from my wild
passion by the new turn she was giving to my thoughts, “my position is
very different; but, to tell you the truth, I must reflect on this; I
had not realized that this was your meaning.”

“And how should I have meant otherwise?” she answered. “Is not a woman
dishonoured by giving herself to a man who is not her husband? I do not
wish to dishonour myself; and, since you love me, you would not wish
it either. You would not do me an irreparable wrong. If such were your
intention you would be my deadliest enemy.”

“Stay, Edmee, stay!” I answered. “I can tell you nothing about my
intentions in regard to you, for I have never had any very definite.
I have felt nothing but wild desires, nor have I ever thought of you
without going mad. You wish me to marry you? But why--why?”

“Because a girl who respects herself cannot be any man’s except with the
thought, with the intention, with the certainty of being his forever. Do
you not know that?”

“There are so many things I do not know or have never thought of.”

“Education will teach you, Bernard, what you ought to think about the
things which must concern you--about your position, your duties, your
feelings. At present you see but dimly into your heart and conscience.
And I, who am accustomed to question myself on all subjects and to
discipline my life, how can I take for master a man governed by instinct
and guided by chance?”

“For master! For husband! Yes, I understand that you cannot surrender
your whole life to an animal such as myself . . . but that is what I
have never asked of you. No, I tremble to think of it.”

“And yet, Bernard, you must think of it. Think of it frequently, and
when you have done so you will realize the necessity of following my
advice, and of bringing your mind into harmony with the new life upon
which you have entered since quitting Roche-Mauprat. When you have
perceived this necessity you must tell me, and then we will make several
necessary resolutions.”

She withdrew her hand from mine quickly, and I fancy she bade me
good-night; but this I did not hear. I stood buried in my thoughts, and
when I raised my head to speak to her she was no longer there. I went
into the chapel, but she had returned to her room by an upper gallery
which communicated with her apartments.

I went back into the garden, walked far into the park, and remained
there all night. This conversation with Edmee had opened a new world
to me. Hitherto I had not ceased to be the Roche-Mauprat man, nor had I
ever contemplated that it was possible or desirable to cease to be so.
Except for some habits which had changed with circumstances, I had never
moved out of the narrow circle of my old thoughts. I felt annoyed that
these new surroundings of mine should have any real power over me, and
I secretly braced my will so that I should not be humbled. Such was my
perseverance and strength of character that I believed nothing would
ever have driven me from my intrenchment of obstinacy, had not Edmee’s
influence been brought to bear upon me. The vulgar comforts of life, the
satisfactions of luxury, had no attraction for me beyond their novelty.
Bodily repose was a burden to me, and the calm that reigned in this
house, so full of order and silence, would have been unbearable, had
not Edmee’s presence and the tumult of my own desires communicated to it
some of my disorder, and peopled it with some of my visions. Never for
a single moment had I desired to become the head of this house, the
possessor of this property; and it was with genuine pleasure that I
had just heard Edmee do justice to my disinterestedness. The thought of
coupling two ends so entirely distinct as my passion and my interests
was still more repugnant to me. I roamed about the park a prey to a
thousand doubts, and then wandered into the open country unconsciously.
It was a glorious night. The full moon was pouring down floods of soft
light upon the ploughed lands, all parched by the heat of the sun.
Thirsty plants were straightening their bowed stems--each leaf seemed
to be drinking in through all its pores all the dewy freshness of the
night. I, too, began to feel a soothing influence at work. My heart was
still beating violently, but regularly. I was filled with a vague hope;
the image of Edmee floated before me on the paths through the meadows,
and no longer stirred the wild agonies and frenzied desires which had
been devouring me since the night I first beheld her.

I was crossing a spot where the green stretches of pasture were here and
there broken by clumps of young trees. Huge oxen with almost white skins
were lying in the short grass, motionless, as if plunged in peaceful
thought. Hills sloped gently up to the horizon, and their velvety
contours seemed to ripple in the bright rays of the moon. For the first
time in my life I realized something of the voluptuous beauty and divine
effluence of the night. I felt the magic touch of some unknown bliss.
It seemed that for the first time in my life I was looking on moon and
meadows and hills. I remembered hearing Edmee say that nothing our eyes
can behold is more lovely than Nature; and I was astonished that I had
never felt this before. Now and them I was on the point of throwing
myself on my knees and praying to God: but I feared that I should not
know how to speak to Him, and that I might offend Him by praying badly.
Shall I confess to you a singular fancy that came upon me, a childish
revelation, as it were, of poetic love from out of the chaos of my
ignorance? The moon was lighting up everything so plainly that I could
distinguish the tiniest flowers in the grass. A little meadow daisy
seemed to me so beautiful with its golden calyx full of diamonds of
dew and its white collaret fringed with purple, that I plucked it, and
covered it with kisses, and cried in a sort of delirious intoxication:

“It is you, Edmee! Yes, it is you! Ah, you no longer shun me!”

But what was my confusion when, on rising, I found there had been a
witness of my folly. Patience was standing before me.

I was so angry at having been surprised in such a fit of extravagance
that, from a remnant of the Hamstringer instinct, I immediately felt
for a knife in my belt; but neither belt nor knife was there. My silk
waistcoat with its pocket reminded me that I was doomed to cut no more
throats. Patience smiled.

“Well, well! What is the matter?” said the anchorite, in a calm and
kindly tone. “Do you imagine that I don’t know perfectly well how things
stand? I am not so simple but that I can reason; I am not so old but
that I can see. Who is it that makes the branches of my yew shake
whenever the holy maiden is sitting at my door? Who is it that follows
us like a young wolf with measured steps through the copse when I take
the lovely child to her father? And what harm is there in it? You are
both young; you are both handsome; you are of the same family; and, if
you chose, you might become a noble and honest man as she is a noble and
honest girl.”

All my wrath had vanished as I listened to Patience speaking of Edmee.
I had such a vast longing to talk about her that I would even have
been willing to have heard evil spoken of her, for the sole pleasure
of hearing her name pronounced. I continued my walk by the side of
Patience. The old man was tramping through the dew with bare feet. It
should be mentioned, however, that his feet had long been unacquainted
with any covering and had attained a degree of callosity that rendered
them proof against anything. His only garments were a pair of blue
canvas breeches which, in the absence of braces, hung loosely from his
hips, and a coarse shirt. He could not endure any constraint in his
clothes; and his skin, hardened by exposure, was sensitive to neither
heat nor cold. Even when over eighty he was accustomed to go bareheaded
in the broiling sun and with half-open shirt in the winter blasts.
Since Edmee had seen to his wants he had attained a certain cleanliness.
Nevertheless, in the disorder of his toilet and his hatred of everything
that passed the bounds of the strictest necessity (though he could not
have been charged with immodesty, which had always been odious to him),
the cynic of the old days was still apparent. His beard was shining like
silver. His bald skull was so polished that the moon was reflected in
it as in water. He walked slowly, with his hands behind his back and his
head raised, like a man who is surveying his empire. But most frequently
his glances were thrown skywards, and he interrupted his conversation to
point to the starry vault and exclaim:

“Look at that; look how beautiful it is!”

He is the only peasant I have ever known to admire the sky; or, at
least, he is the only one I have ever seen who was conscious of his
admiration.

“Why, Master Patience,” I said to him, “do you think I might be an
honest man if I chose? Do you think that I am not one already?”

“Oh, do not be angry,” he answered. “Patience is privileged to say
anything. Is he not the fool of the chateau?”

“On the contrary, Edmee maintains that you are its sage.”

“Does the holy child of God say that? Well, if she believes so, I will
try to act as a wise man, and give you some good advice, Master Bernard
Mauprat. Will you accept it?”

“It seems to me that in this place every one takes upon himself to give
advice. Never mind, I am listening.”

“You are in love with your cousin, are you not?”

“You are very bold to ask such a question.”

“It is not a question, it is a fact. Well, my advice is this: make your
cousin love you, and become her husband.”

“And why do you take this interest in me, Master Patience?”

“Because I know you deserve it.”

“Who told you so? The abbe?”

“No.”

“Edmee?”

“Partly. And yet she is certainly not very much in love with you. But it
is your own fault.”

“How so, Patience?”

“Because she wants you to become clever; and you--you would rather not.
Oh, if I were only your age; yes, I, poor Patience; and if I were able,
without feeling stifled, to shut myself up in a room for only two hours
a day; and if all those I met were anxious to teach me; if they said to
me, ‘Patience, this is what was done yesterday; Patience, this is what
will be done to-morrow.’ But, enough! I have to find out everything
myself, and there is so much that I shall die of old age before finding
out a tenth part of what I should like to know. But, listen: I have yet
another reason for wishing you to marry Edmee.”

“What is that, good Monsieur Patience?”

“This La Marche is not the right man for her. I have told her so--yes,
I have; and himself too, and the abbe, and everybody. He is not a man,
that thing. He smells as sweet as a whole flower-garden; but I prefer
the tiniest sprig of wild thyme.”

“Faith! I have but little love for him myself. But if my cousin likes
him, what then, Patience?”

“Your cousin does not like him. She thinks he is a good man; she thinks
him genuine. She is mistaken; he deceives her, as he deceives everybody.
Yes, I know: he is a man who has not any of this (and Patience put his
hand to his heart). He is a man who is always proclaiming: ‘In me behold
the champion of virtue, the champion of the unfortunate, the champion
of all the wise men and friends of the human race, etc., etc.’ While
I--Patience--I know that he lets poor folk die of hunger at the gates
of his chateau. I know that if any one said to him, ‘Give up your castle
and eat black bread, give up your lands and become a soldier, and then
there will be no more misery in the world, the human race--as you call
it--will be saved,’ his real self would answer, ‘Thanks, I am lord of
my lands, and I am not yet tired of my castle.’ Oh! I know them so well,
these sham paragons. How different with Edmee! You do not know that. You
love her because she is as beautiful as the daisy in the meadows, while
I--I love her because she is good as the moon that sheds light on all.
She is a girl who gives away everything that she has; who would not wear
a jewel, because with the gold in a ring a man could be kept alive for a
year. And if she finds a foot-sore child by the road-side, she takes off
her shoes and gives them to him, and goes on her way bare-footed. Then,
look you, hers is a heart that never swerves. If to-morrow the village
of Saint-Severe were to go to her in a body and say: ‘Young lady, you
have lived long enough in the lap of wealth, give us what you have, and
take your turn at work’--‘That is but fair, my good friends,’ she would
reply, and with a glad heart she would go and tend the flocks in the
fields. Her mother was the same. I knew her mother when she was quite
young, young as yourself; and I knew yours too. Oh, yes. She was a lady
with a noble mind, charitable and just to all. And you take after her,
they say.”

“Alas, no,” I answered, deeply touched by these words of Patience. “I
know neither charity nor justice.”

“You have not been able to practise them yet, but they are written in
your heart. I can read them there. People call me a sorcerer, and so I
am in a measure. I know a man directly I see him. Do you remember what
you said to me one day on the heath at Valide? You were with Sylvain
and I with Marcasse. You told me that an honest man avenges his wrongs
himself. And, by-the-bye, Monsieur Mauprat, if you are not satisfied
with the apologies I made you at Gazeau Tower, you may say so. See,
there is no one near; and, old as I am, I have still a fist as good as
yours. We can exchange a few healthy blows--that is Nature’s way. And,
though I do not approve of it, I never refuse satisfaction to any
one who demands it. There are some men, I know, who would die of
mortification if they did not have their revenge: and it has taken
me--yes, the man you see before you--more than fifty years to forget an
insult I once received . . . and even now, whenever I think of it, my
hatred of the nobles springs up again, and I hold it as a crime to have
let my heart forgive some of them.”

“I am fully satisfied, Master Patience; and in truth I now feel nothing
but affection for you.”

“Ah, that comes of my scratching your back. Youth is ever generous.
Come, Mauprat, take courage. Follow the abbe’s advice; he is a good
man. Try to please your cousin; she is a star in the firmament. Find out
truth; love the people; hate those who hate them; be ready to sacrifice
yourself for them. . . . Yes, one word more--listen. I know what I am
saying--become the people’s friend.”

“Is the people, then, better than the nobility, Patience? Come now,
honestly, since you are a wise man, tell me the truth.”

“Ay, we are worth more than the nobles, because they trample us under
foot, and we let them. But we shall not always bear this, perhaps. No;
you will have to know it sooner or later, and I may as well tell you
now. You see yonder stars? They will never change. Ten thousand years
hence they will be in the same place and be giving forth as much light
as to-day; but within the next hundred years, maybe within less, there
will be many a change on this earth. Take the word of a man who has an
eye for the truth of things, and does not let himself be led astray by
the fine airs of the great. The poor have suffered enough; they will
turn upon the rich, and their castles will fail and their lands be
carved up. I shall not see it; but you will. There will be ten cottages
in the place of this park, and ten families will live on its revenue.
There will no longer be servants or masters, or villein or lord. Some
nobles will cry aloud and yield only to force, as your uncles would do
if they were alive, and as M. de la Marche will do in spite of all his
fine talk. Others will sacrifice themselves generously, like Edmee, and
like yourself, if you listen to wisdom. And in that hour it will be well
for Edmee that her husband is a man and not a mere fop. It will be well
for Bernard Mauprat that he knows how to drive a plough or kill the game
which the good God has sent to feed his family; for old Patience will
then be lying under the grass in the churchyard, unable to return the
services which Edmee has done him. Do not laugh at what I say, young
man; it is the voice of God that is speaking. Look at the heavens. The
stars live in peace, and nothing disturbs their eternal order. The
great do not devour the small, and none fling themselves upon their
neighbours. Now, a day will come when the same order will reign among
men. The wicked will be swept away by the breath of the Lord. Strengthen
your legs, Seigneur Mauprat, that you may stand firm to support Edmee.
It is Patience that warns you; Patience who wishes you naught but good.
But there will come others who wish you ill, and the good must make
themselves strong.”

We had reached Patience’s cottage. He had stopped at the gate of his
little inclosure, resting one hand on the cross-bar and waving the other
as he spoke. His voice was full of passion, his eyes flashed fire, and
his brow was bathed in sweat. There seemed to be some weird power in
his words as in those of the prophets of old. The more than plebeian
simplicity of his dress still further increased the pride of his
gestures and the impressiveness of his voice. The French Revolution
has shown since that in the ranks of the people there was no lack of
eloquence or of pitiless logic; but what I saw at that moment was so
novel, and made such an impression on me, that my unruly and unbridled
imagination was carried away by the superstitious terrors of childhood.
He held out his hand, and I responded with more of terror than
affection. The sorcerer of Gazeau Tower hanging the bleeding owl above
my head had just risen before my eyes again.




XI

When I awoke on the morrow in a state of exhaustion, all the incidents
of the previous night appeared to me as a dream. I began to think that
Edmee’s suggestion of becoming my wife had been a perfidious trick to
put off my hopes indefinitely; and, as to the sorcerer’s words, I could
not recall them without a feeling of profound humiliation. Still, they
had produced their effect. My emotions had left traces which could never
be effaced. I was no longer the man of the day before, and never again
was I to be quite the man of Roche-Mauprat.

It was late, for not until morning had I attempted to make good my
sleepless night. I was still in bed when I heard the hoofs of M. de la
Marche’s horse on the stones of the courtyard. Every day he used to come
at this hour; every day he used to see Edmee at the same time as myself;
and now, on this very day, this day when she had tried to persuade me to
reckon on her hand, he was going to see her before me, and to give his
soulless kiss to this hand that had been promised to myself. The
thought of it stirred up all my doubts again. How could Edmee endure his
attentions if she really meant to marry another man? Perhaps she dared
not send him away; perhaps it was my duty to do so. I was ignorant of
the ways of the world into which I was entering. Instinct counselled me
to yield to my hasty impulses; and instinct spoke loudly.

I hastily dressed myself. I entered the drawing-room pale and agitated.
Edmee was pale too. It was a cold, rainy morning. A fire was burning in
the great fire-place. Lying back in an easy chair, she was warming
her little feet and dozing. It was the same listless, almost lifeless,
attitude of the days of her illness. M. de la Marche was reading the
paper at the other end of the room. On seeing that Edmee was more
affected than myself by the emotions of the previous night, I felt my
anger cool, and, approaching her noiselessly, I sat down and gazed on
her tenderly.

“Is that you, Bernard?” she asked without moving a limb, and with eyes
still closed.

Her elbows were resting on the arms of her chair and her hands were
gracefully crossed under her chin. At that period it was the fashion
for women to have their arms half bare at all times. On one of Edmee’s I
noticed a little strip of court-plaster that made my heart beat. It was
the slight scratch I had caused against the bars of the chapel window. I
gently lifted the lace which fell over her elbow, and, emboldened by her
drowsiness, pressed my lips to the darling wound. M. de la Marche could
see me, and, in fact, did see me, as I intended he should. I was
burning to have a quarrel with him. Edmee started and turned red; but
immediately assuming an air of indolent playfulness, she said:

“Really, Bernard, you are as gallant this morning as a court abbe. Do
you happen to have been composing a madrigal last night?”

I was peculiarly mortified at this jesting. However, paying her back in
her own coin, I answered:

“Yes; I composed one yesterday evening at the chapel window; and if it
is a poor thing, cousin, it is your fault.”

“Say, rather, that it is the fault of your education,” she replied,
kindling.

And she was never more beautiful than when her natural pride and spirit
were roused.

“My own opinion is that I am being very much over-educated,” I answered;
“and that if I gave more heed to my natural good sense you would not
jeer at me so much.”

“Really, it seems to me that you are indulging in a veritable war of
wits with Bernard,” said M. de la Marche, folding his paper carelessly
and approaching us.

“I cry quits with her,” I answered, annoyed at this impertinence. “Let
her keep her wit for such as you.”

I had risen to insult him, but he did not seem to notice it; and
standing with his back to the fire he bent down towards Edmee and said,
in a gentle and almost affectionate voice:

“What is the matter with him?” as if he were inquiring after the health
of her little dog.

“How should I know?” she replied, in the same tone.

Then she rose and added:

“My head aches too much to remain here. Give me your arm and take me up
to my room.”

She went out, leaning upon his arm. I was left there stupefied.

I remained in the drawing-room, resolved to insult him as soon as he
should return. But the abbe now entered, and soon afterward my Uncle
Hubert. They began to talk on subjects which were quite strange to me
(the subjects of their conversation were nearly always so). I did not
know what to do to obtain revenge. I dared not betray myself in my
uncle’s presence. I was sensible to the respect I owed to him and to his
hospitality. Never had I done such violence to myself at Roche-Mauprat.
Yet, in spite of all efforts, my anger showed itself. I almost died at
being obliged to wait for revenge. Several times the chevalier noticed
the change in my features and asked in a kind tone if I were ill. M.
de la Marche seemed neither to observe nor to guess anything. The abbe
alone examined me attentively. More than once I caught his blue eyes
anxiously fixed on me, those eyes in which natural penetration was
always veiled by habitual shyness. The abbe did not like me. I could
easily see that his kindly, cheerful manners grew cold in spite of
himself as soon as he spoke to me; and I noticed, too, that his face
would invariably assume a sad expression at my approach.

The constraint that I was enduring was so alien to my habits and so
beyond my strength that I came nigh to fainting. To obtain relief I went
and threw myself on the grass in the park. This was a refuge to me in
all my troubles. These mighty oaks, this moss which had clung to their
branches through the centuries, these pale, sweet-scented wild flowers,
emblems of secret sorrow, these were the friends of my childhood, and
these alone I had found the same in social as in savage life. I buried
my face in my hands; and I never remember having suffered more in any of
the calamities of my life, though some that I had to bear afterward
were very real. On the whole I ought to have accounted myself lucky, on
giving up the rough and perilous trade of a cut-throat, to find so many
unexpected blessings--affection, devotion, riches, liberty, education,
good precepts and good examples. But it is certain that, in order to
pass from a given state to its opposite, though it be from evil to
good, from grief to joy, from fatigue to repose, the soul of a man must
suffer; in this hour of birth of a new destiny all the springs of his
being are strained almost to breaking--even as at the approach of summer
the sky is covered with dark clouds, and the earth, all a-tremble, seems
about to be annihilated by the tempest.

At this moment my only thought was to devise some means of appeasing my
hatred of M. de la Marche without betraying and without even arousing
a suspicion of the mysterious bond which held Edmee in my power. Though
nothing was less respected at Roche-Mauprat than the sanctity of an
oath, yet the little reading I had had there--those ballads of chivalry
of which I have already spoken--had filled me with an almost romantic
love of good faith; and this was about the only virtue I had acquired
there. My promise of secrecy to Edmee was therefore inviolable in my
eyes.

“However,” I said to myself, “I dare say I shall find some plausible
pretext for throwing myself upon my enemy and strangling him.”

To confess the truth, this was far from easy with a man who seemed bent
on being all politeness and kindness.

Distracted by these thoughts, I forgot the dinner hour; and when I saw
the sun sinking behind the turrets of the castle I realized too late
that my absence must have been noticed, and that I could not appear
without submitting to Edmee’s searching questions, and to the abbe’s
cold, piercing gaze, which, though it always seemed to avoid mine, I
would suddenly surprise in the act of sounding the very depths of my
conscience.

I resolved not to return to the house till nightfall, and I threw myself
upon the grass and tried to find rest for my aching head in sleep. I did
fall asleep in fact. When I awoke the moon was rising in the heavens,
which were still red with the glow of sunset. The noise which had
aroused me was very slight; but there are some sounds which strike the
heart before reaching the ear; and the subtlest emanations of love will
at times pierce through the coarsest organization. Edmee’s voice had
just pronounced my name a short distance away, behind some foliage. At
first I thought I had been dreaming; I remained where I was, held my
breath and listened. It was she, on her way to the hermit’s, in company
with the abbe. They had stopped in a covered walk five or six yards from
me, and they were talking in low voices, but in those clear tones which,
in an exchange of confidence, compels attention with peculiar solemnity.

“I fear,” Edmee was saying, “that there will be trouble between him and
M. de la Marche; perhaps something very serious--who knows? You do not
understand Bernard.”

“He must be got away from here, at all costs,” answered the abbe. “You
cannot live in this way, continually exposed to the brutality of a
brigand.”

“It cannot be called living. Since he set foot in the house I have not
had a moment’s peace of mind. Imprisoned in my room, or forced to seek
the protection of my friends, I am almost afraid to move. It is as much
as I dare to do to creep downstairs, and I never cross the corridor
without sending Leblanc ahead as a scout. The poor woman, who has always
found me so brave, now thinks I am mad. The suspense is horrible. I
cannot sleep unless I first bolt the door. And look, abbe, I never walk
about without a dagger, like the heroine of a Spanish ballad, neither
more nor less.”

“And if this wretch meets you and frightens you, you will plunge it
into your bosom? Oh! that must not be. Edmee, we must find some means
of changing a position which is no longer tenable. I take it that you do
not wish to deprive him of your father’s friendship by confessing to the
latter the monstrous bargain you were forced to make with this bandit at
Roche-Mauprat. But whatever may happen--ah! my poor little Edmee, I am
not a bloodthirsty man, but twenty times a day I find myself deploring
that my character of priest prevents me from challenging this creature,
and ridding you of him forever.”

This charitable regret, expressed so artlessly in my very ear, made me
itch to reveal myself to them at once, were it only to put the abbe’s
warlike humour to the proof; but I was restrained by the hope that I
should at last discover Edmee’s real feelings and real intentions in
regard to myself.

“Have no fear,” she said, in a careless tone. “If he tries my patience
too much, I shall not have the slightest hesitation in planting this
blade in his cheek. I am quite sure that a little blood-letting will
cool his ardour.”

Then they drew a few steps nearer.

“Listen to me, Edmee,” said the abbe, stopping again. “We cannot discuss
this matter with Patience. Let us come to some decision before we put it
aside. Your relations with Bernard are now drawing to a crisis. It seems
to me, my child, that you are not doing all you ought to ward off the
evils that may strike us; for everything that is painful to you will be
painful to all of us, and will touch us to the bottom of our hearts.”

“I am all attention, excellent friend,” answered Edmee; “scold me,
advise me, as you will.”

So saying she leant back against the tree at the foot of which I was
lying among the brushwood and long grass. I fancy she might have seen
me, for I could see her distinctly. However, she little thought that I
was gazing on her divine face, over which the night breeze was throwing,
now the shadows of the rustling leaves, and now the pale diamonds that
the moon showers down through the trees of the forest.

“My opinion, Edmee,” answered the abbe, crossing his arms on his breast
and striking his brow at intervals, “is that you do not take the right
view of your situation. At times it distresses you to such an extent
that you lose all hope and long to die--yes, my dear child, to such
an extent that your health plainly suffers. At other times, and I must
speak candidly at the risk of offending you a little, you view your
perils with a levity and cheerfulness that astound me.”

“That last reproach is delicately put, dear friend,” she replied; “but
allow me to justify myself. Your astonishment arises from the fact that
you do not know the Mauprat race. It is a tameless, incorrigible race,
from which naught but Headbreakers and Hamstringers may issue. Even
in those who have been most polished by education there remains many a
stubborn knot--a sovereign pride, a will of iron, a profound contempt
for life. Look at my father. In spite of his adorable goodness, you see
that he is sometimes so quick-tempered that he will smash his snuff-box
on the table, when you get the better of him in some political argument,
or when you win a game of chess. For myself, I am conscious that my
veins are as full-blooded as if I had been born in the noble ranks of
the people; and I do not believe that any Mauprat has ever shone at
court for the charm of his manners. Since I was born brave, how would
you have me set much store by life? And yet there are weak moments in
which I get discouraged more than enough, and bemoan my fate like the
true woman that I am. But, let some one offend me, or threaten me, and
the blood of the strong surges through me again; and then, as I cannot
crush my enemy, I fold my arms and smile with compassion at the idea
that he should ever have hoped to frighten me. And do not look upon this
as mere bombast, abbe. To-morrow, this evening perhaps, my words may
turn to deeds. This little pearl-handled knife does not look like deeds
of blood; still, it will be able to do its work, and ever since Don
Marcasse (who knows what he is about) sharpened it, I have had it by me
night and day, and my mind is made up. I have not a very strong fist,
but it will no doubt manage to give myself a good stab with this knife,
even as it manages to give my horse a cut with the whip. Well, that
being so, my honour is safe; it is only my life, which hangs by a
thread, which is at the mercy of a glass of wine, more or less, that
M. Bernard may happen to drink one of these evenings; of some change
meeting, or some exchange of looks between De la Marche and myself that
he may fancy he has detected; a breath of air perhaps! What is to be
done? Were I to grieve, would my tears wash away the past? We cannot
tear out a single page of our lives; but we can throw the book into
the fire. Though I should weep from night till morn, would that prevent
Destiny from having, in a fit of ill-humour, taken me out hunting, sent
me astray in the woods, and made me stumble across a Mauprat, who led me
to his den, where I escaped dishonour and perhaps death only by binding
my life forever to that of a savage who had none of my principles, and
who probably (and who undoubtedly, I should say) never will have them?
All this is a misfortune. I was in the full sunlight of a happy destiny;
I was the pride and joy of my old father; I was about to marry a man
I esteem and like; no sorrows, no fears had come near my path; I knew
neither days fraught with danger nor nights bereft of sleep. Well, God
did not wish such a beautiful life to continue; His will be done. There
are days when the ruin of all my hopes seems to me so inevitable that
I look upon myself as dead and my _fiance_ as a widower. If it were not
for my poor father, I should really laugh at it all; for I am so ill
built for vexation and fears that during the short time I have known
them they have already tired me of life.”

“This courage is heroic, but it is also terrible,” cried the abbe, in a
broken voice. “It is almost a resolve to commit suicide, Edmee.”

“Oh, I shall fight for my life,” she answered, with warmth; “but I shall
not stand haggling with it a moment if my honour does not come forth
safe and sound from all these risks. No; I am not pious enough ever to
accept a soiled life by way of penance for sins of which I never had a
thought. If God deals so harshly with me that I have to choose between
shame and death . . .”

“There can never be any shame for you, Edmee; a soul so chaste, so pure
in intention . . .”

“Oh, don’t talk of that, dear abbe! Perhaps I am not as good as you
think; I am not very orthodox in religion--nor are you, abbe! I give
little heed to the world; I have no love for it. I neither fear nor
despise public opinion; it will never enter into my life. I am not very
sure what principle of virtue would be strong enough to prevent me from
falling, if the spirit of evil took me in hand. I have read _La Nouvelle
Heloise_, and I shed many tears over it. But, because I am a Mauprat and
have an unbending pride, I will never endure the tyranny of any man--the
violence of a lover no more than a husband’s blow; only a servile soul
and a craven character may yield to force that which it refuses to
entreaty. Sainte Solange, the beautiful shepherdess, let her head be cut
off rather than submit to the seigneur’s rights. And you know that from
mother to daughter the Mauprats have been consecrated in baptism to the
protection of the patron saint of Berry.”

“Yes; I know that you are proud and resolute,” said the abbe, “and
because I respect you more than any woman in the world I want you to
live, and be free, and make a marriage worthy of you, so that in the
human family you may fill the part which beautiful souls still know how
to make noble. Besides, you are necessary to your father; your death
would hurry him to his grave, hearty and robust as the Mauprat still is.
Put away these gloomy thoughts, then, and these violent resolutions. It
is impossible. This adventure of Roche-Mauprat must be looked upon only
as an evil dream. We both had a nightmare in those hours of horror; but
it is time for us to awake; we cannot remain paralyzed with fear like
children. You have only one course open to you, and that I have already
pointed out.”

“But, abbe, it is the one which I hold the most impossible of all. I
have sworn by everything that is most sacred in the universe and the
human heart.”

“An oath extorted by threats and violence is binding on none; even human
laws decree this. Divine laws, especially in a case of this nature,
absolve the human conscience beyond a doubt. If you were orthodox, I
would go to Rome--yes, I would go on foot--to get you absolved from so
rash a vow; but you are not a submissive child of the Pope, Edmee--nor
am I.”

“You wish me, then, to perjure myself?”

“Your soul would not be perjured.”

“My soul would! I took an oath with a full knowledge of what I was doing
and at a time when I might have killed myself on the spot; for in my
hand I had a knife three times as large as this. But I wanted to live;
above all, I wanted to see my father again and kiss him. To put an end
to the agony which my disappearance must have caused him, I would have
bartered more than my life, I would have bartered my immortal soul.
Since then, too, as I told you last night, I have renewed my vow, and
of my own free-will, moreover; for there was a wall between my amiable
_fiance_ and myself.”

“How could you have been so imprudent, Edmee? Here again I fail to
understand you.”

“That I can quite believe, for I do not understand myself,” said Edmee,
with a peculiar expression.

“My dear child, you must open your hear to me freely. I am the only
person here who can advise you, since I am the only one to whom you can
tell everything under the seal of a friendship as sacred as the secrecy
of Catholic confession can be. Answer me, then. You do not really look
upon a marriage between yourself and Bernard Mauprat as possible?”

“How should that which is inevitable be impossible?” said Edmee. “There
is nothing more possible than throwing one’s self into the river;
nothing more possible than surrendering one’s self to misery and
despair; nothing more possible, consequently, than marrying Bernard
Mauprat.”

“In any case I will not be the one to celebrate such an absurd and
deplorable union,” cried the abbe. “You, the wife and the slave of this
Hamstringer! Edmee, you said just now that you would no more endure the
violence of a lover than a husband’s blow.”

“You think the he would beat me?”

“If he did not kill you.”

“Oh, no,” she replied, in a resolute tone, with a wave of the knife, “I
would kill him first. When Mauprat meets Mauprat . . .!”

“You can laugh, Edmee? O my God! you can laugh at the thought of such
a match! But, even if this man had some affection and esteem for you,
think how impossible it would be for you to have anything in common;
think of the coarseness of his ideas, the vulgarity of his speech. The
heart rises in disgust at the idea of such a union. Good God! In what
language would you speak to him?”

Once more I was on the point of rising and falling on my panegyrist; but
I overcame my rage. Edmee began to speak, and I was all ears again.

“I know very well that at the end of three or four days I should have
nothing better to do than cut my own throat; but since sooner or later
it must come to that, why should I not go forward to the inevitable
hour? I confess that I shall be sorry to leave life. Not all those
who have been to Roche-Mauprat have returned. I went there not to meet
death, but to betroth myself to it. Well, then, I will go on to my
wedding-day, and if Bernard is too odious, I will kill myself after the
ball.”

“Edmee, your head seems full of romantic notions at present,” said the
abbe, losing patience. “Thank God, your father will never consent to
the marriage. He has given his word to M. de la March, and you too have
given yours. This is the only promise that is valid.”

“My father would consent--yes, with joy--to an arrangement which
perpetuated his name and line directly. As to M. de la March, he will
release me from any promise without my taking the trouble to ask him; as
soon as he hears that I passed two hours at Roche-Mauprat there will be
no need of any other explanation.”

“He would be very unworthy of the esteem I feel for him, if he
considered your good name tarnished by an unfortunate adventure from
which you came out pure.”

“Thanks to Bernard,” said Edmee; “for after all I ought to be grateful
to him; in spite of his reservations and conditions, he performed a
great and inconceivable action, for a Hamstringer.”

“God forbid that I should deny the good qualities which education may
have developed in this young man; and it may still be possible, by
approaching him on this better side of his, to make him listen to
reason.”

“And make him consent to be taught? Never. Even if he should show
himself willing, he would no more be able than Patience. When the body
is made for an animal life, the spirit can no longer submit to the laws
of the intellect.”

“I think so too; but that is not the point. I suggest that you should
have an explanation with him, and make him understand that he is bound
in honour to release you from your promise and resign himself to your
marriage with M. de la Marche. Either he is a brute unworthy of the
slightest esteem and consideration, or he will realize his crime and
folly and yield honestly and with a good grace. Free me from the vow of
secrecy to which I am bound; authorize me to deal plainly with him and I
will guarantee success.”

“And I--I will guarantee the contrary,” said Edmee. “Besides, I could
not consent to this. Whatever Bernard may be, I am anxious to come out
of our duel with honour; and if I acted as you suggest, he would have
cause to believe that up to the present I have been unworthily trifling
with him.”

“Well, there is only one means left, and that is to trust to the honour
and discretion of M. de la Marche. Set before him the details of your
position, and then let him give the verdict. You have a perfect right to
intrust him with your secret, and you are quite sure of his honour. If
he is coward enough to desert you in such a position, your remaining
resource is to take shelter from Bernard’s violence behind the iron bars
of a convent. You can remain there a few years; you can make a show of
taking the veil. The young man will forget you, and they will set you
free again.”

“Indeed, that is the only reasonable course to take, and I had already
thought of it; but it is not yet time to make the move.”

“Very true; you must first see the result of your confession to M. de la
Marche. If, as I make no doubt, he is a man of mettle, he will take
you under his protection, and then procure the removal of this Bernard,
whether by persuasion or authority.”

“What authority, abbe, if you please?”

“The authority which our customs allow one gentleman to exercise over
his equal--honour and the sword.”

“Oh, abbe! You too, then are a man with a thirst for blood. Well, that
is precisely what I have hitherto tried to avoid, and what I will avoid,
though it cost me my life and honour. I do not wish that there should be
any fight between these two men.”

“I understand: one of the two is very rightly dear to you. But evidently
in this duel it is not M. de la Marche who would be in danger.”

“Then it would be Bernard,” cried Edmee. “Well, I should hate M. de la
Marche, if he insisted on a duel with this poor boy, who only knows how
to handle a stick or a sling. How can such ideas occur to you, abbe?
You must really loathe this unfortunate Bernard. And fancy me getting
my husband to cut his throat as a return for having saved my life at the
risk of his own. No, no; I will not suffer any one either to challenge
him, or humiliate him, or persecute him. He is my cousin; he is a
Mauprat; he is almost a brother. I will not let him be driven out of
this home. Rather I will go myself.”

“These are very generous sentiments, Edmee,” answered the abbe. “But
with what warmth you express them! I stand confounded; and, if I were
not afraid of offending you, I should confess that this solicitude for
young Mauprat suggests to me a strange thought.”

“Well, what is it, then?” said Edmee, with a certain brusqueness.

“If you insist, of course I will tell you: you seem to take a deeper
interest in this young man than in M. de la Marche, and I could have
wished to think otherwise.”

“Which has the greater need of this interest, you bad Christian?” said
Edmee with a smile. “Is it not the hardened sinner whose eyes have never
looked upon the light?”

“But, come, Edmee! You love M. de la Marche, do you not? For Heaven’s
sake do not jest.”

“If by love,” she replied in a serious tone, “you mean a feeling of
trust and friendship, I love M. de la Marche; but if you mean a feeling
of compassion and solicitude, I love Bernard. It remains to be seen
which of these two affections is the deeper. That is your concern, abbe.
For my part, it troubles me but little; for I feel that there is only
one being whom I love with passion, and that is my father; and only one
thing that I love with enthusiasm, and that is my duty. Probably I shall
regret the attentions and devotion of the lieutenant-general, and I
shall share in the grief that I must soon cause him when I announce that
I can never be his wife. This necessity, however, will by no means drive
me to desperation, because I know that M. de la Marche will quickly
recover. . . . I am not joking, abbe; M. de la Marche is a man of no
depth, and somewhat cold.”

“If your love for him is no greater than this, so much the better. It
makes one trial less among your many trials. Still, this indifference
robs me of my last hope of seeing you rescued from Bernard Mauprat.”

“Do not let this grieve you. Either Bernard will yield to friendship and
loyalty and improve, or I shall escape him.”

“But how?”

“By the gate of the convent--or of the graveyard.”

As she uttered these words in a calm tone, Edmee shook back her long
black hair, which had fallen over her shoulders and partly over her pale
face.

“Come,” she said, “God will help us. It is folly and impiety to doubt
him in the hour of danger. Are we atheists, that we let ourselves be
discouraged in this way? Let us go and see Patience. . . . He will bring
forth some wise saw to ease our minds; he is the old oracle who solves
all problems without understanding any.”

They moved away, while I remained in a state of consternation.

Oh, how different was this night from the last! How vast a step I had
just taken in life, no longer on the path of flowers but on the arid
rocks! Now I understood all the odious reality of the part I had been
playing. In the bottom of Edmee’s heart I had just read the fear and
disgust I inspired in her. Nothing could assuage my grief; for nothing
now could arouse my anger. She had no affection for M. de la Marche;
she was trifling neither with him nor with me; she had no affection for
either of us. How could I have believed that her generous sympathy for
me and her sublime devotion to her word were signs of love? How, in the
hours when this presumptuous fancy left me, could I have believed that
in order to resist my passion she must needs feel love for another? It
had come to pass, then, that I had no longer any object on which to vent
my rage; now it could result only in Edmee’s flight or death? Her death!
At the mere thought of it the blood ran cold in my veins, a weight fell
on my heart, and I felt all the stings of remorse piercing it. This
night of agony was for me the clearest call of Providence. At last I
understood those laws of modesty and sacred liberty which my ignorance
had hitherto outraged and blasphemed. They astonished me more than ever;
but I could see them; their sanction was their own existence. Edmee’s
strong, sincere soul appeared before me like the stone of Sinai on which
the finger of God has traced the immutable truth. Her virtue was not
feigned; her knife was sharpened, ready to cut out the stain of my love.
I was so terrified at having been in danger of seeing her die in my
arms; I was so horrified at the gross insult I had offered her while
seeking to overcome her resistance, that I began to devise all manner of
impossible plans for righting the wrongs I had done, and restoring her
peace of mind.

The only one which seemed beyond my powers was to tear myself away from
her; for while these feelings of esteem and respect were springing up in
me, my love was changing its nature, so to speak, and growing vaster and
taking possession of all my being. Edmee appeared to me in a new light.
She was no longer the lovely girl whose presence stirred a tumult in my
senses; she was a young man of my own age, beautiful as a seraph, proud,
courageous, inflexible in honour, generous, capable of that sublime
friendship which once bound together brothers in arms, but with no
passionate love except for Deity, like the paladins of old, who, braving
a thousand dangers, marched to the Holy Land under their golden armour.

From this hour I felt my love descending from the wild storms of the
brain into the healthy regions of the heart. Devotion seemed no longer
an enigma to me. I resolved that on the very next morning I would give
proof of my submission and affection. It was quite late when I returned
to the chateau, tired out, dying of hunger, and exhausted by the
emotions I had experienced. I entered the pantry, found a piece of
bread, and began eating it, all moist with my tears. I was leaning
against the stove in the dime light of a lamp that was almost out, when
I suddenly saw Edmee enter. She took a few cherries from a chest and
slowly approached the stove, pale and deep in thought. On seeing me she
uttered a cry and let the cherries fall.

“Edmee,” I said, “I implore you never to be afraid of me again. That is
all I can say now; for I do not know how to explain myself; and yet I
had resolved to say many things.”

“You must tell me them some other time, cousin,” she answered, trying to
smile.

But she was unable to disguise the fear she felt at finding herself
alone with me.

I did not try to detain her. I felt deeply pained and humiliated at her
distrust of me, and I knew I had no right to complain. Yet never had any
man stood in greater need of a word of encouragement.

Just as she was going out of the room I broke down altogether, and burst
into tears, as on the previous night at the chapel window. Edmee stopped
on the threshold and hesitated a moment. Then, yielding to the kindly
impulses of her heart, she overcame her fears and returned towards me.
Pausing a few yards from my chair, she said:

“Bernard, you are unhappy. Tell me; is it my fault?”

I was unable to reply; I was ashamed of my tears, but the more I tried
to restrain them the more my breast heaved with sobs. With men as
physically strong as I was, tears are generally convulsions; mine were
like the pangs of death.

“Come now! Just tell me what is wrong,” cried Edmee, with some of the
bluntness of sisterly affection.

And she ventured to put her hand on my shoulder. She was looking at me
with an expression of wistfulness, and a big tear was trickling down her
cheek. I threw myself on my knees and tried to speak, but that was still
impossible. I could do no more than mutter the word _to-morrow_ several
times.

“‘To-morrow?’ What of tomorrow?” said Edmee. “Do you not like being
here? Do you want to go away?”

“I will go, if it will please you,” I replied. “Tell me; do you wish
never to see me again?”

“I do not wish that at all,” she rejoined. “You will stop here, won’t
you.”

“It is for you to decide,” I answered.

She looked at me in astonishment. I was still on my knees. She leant
over the back of my chair.

“Yes; I am quite sure that you are good at heart,” she said, as if
she were answering some inner objection. “A Mauprat can be nothing by
halves; and as soon as you have once known a good quarter of an hour, it
is certain you ought to have a noble life before you.”

“I will make it so,” I answered.

“You mean it?” she said with unaffected joy.

“On my honour, Edmee, and on yours. Dare you give me your hand?”

“Certainly,” she said.

She held out her hand to me; but she was still trembling.

“You have been forming good resolutions, then?” she said.

“I have been forming such resolutions,” I replied, “that you will never
have to reproach me again. And now, Edmee, when you return to your room,
please do not bolt your door any more. You need no longer be afraid of
me. Henceforth I shall only wish what you wish.”

She again fixed on me a look of amazement. Then, after pressing my hand,
she moved away, but turned round several times to look at me again, as
if unable to believe in such a sudden conversion. At last, stopping in
the doorway, she said to me in an affectionate tone:

“You, too, must go and get some rest. You look tired; and for the last
two days you have seemed sad and very much altered. If you do not wish
to make me anxious, you will take care of yourself, Bernard.”

She gave me a sweet little nod. In her big eyes, already hollowed by
suffering, there was an indefinable expression, in which distrust and
hope, affection and wonder, were depicted alternately or at times all
together.

“I will take care of myself; I will get some sleep; and I will not be
sad any longer,” I answered.

“And you will work?”

“And I will work--but, you, Edmee, will you forgive me for all the pain
I have caused you? and will you try to like me a little?”

“I shall like you very much,” she replied, “if you are always as you are
this evening.”

On the morrow, at daybreak, I went to the abbe’s room. He was already up
and reading.

“Monsieur Aubert,” I said to him, “you have several times offered
to give me lessons. I now come to request you to carry out your kind
offer.”

I had spent part of the night in preparing this opening speech and in
deciding how I had best comport myself in the abbe’s presence. Without
really hating him, for I could quite see that he meant well and that he
bore me ill-will only because of my faults, I felt very bitter towards
him. Inwardly I recognised that I deserved all the bad things he had
said about me to Edmee; but it seemed to me that he might have insisted
somewhat more on the good side of mine to which he had given a merely
passing word, and which could not have escaped the notice of a man so
observant as himself. I had determined, therefore, to be very cold
and very proud in my bearing towards him. To this end I judged with a
certain show of logic, that I ought to display great docility as long as
the lesson lasted, and that immediately afterwards I ought to leave him
with a very curt expression of thanks. In a word, I wished to humiliate
him in his post of tutor; for I was not unaware that he depended for his
livelihood on my uncle, and that, unless he renounced this livelihood
or showed himself ungrateful, he could not well refuse to undertake
my education. My reasoning here was very good; but the spirit which
prompted it was very bad; and subsequently I felt so much regret for my
behaviour that I made him a sort of friendly confession with a request
for absolution.

However, not to anticipate events, I will simply say that the first
few days after my conversation afforded me an ample revenge for the
prejudices, too well founded in many respects, which this man had
against me. He would have deserved the title of “the just,” assigned
him by Patience, had not a habit of distrust interfered with his first
impulses. The persecutions of which he had so long been the object had
developed in him this instinctive feeling of fear, which remained with
him all his life, and made trust in others always very difficult to him,
though all the more flattering and touching perhaps when he accorded it.
Since then I have observed this characteristic in many worthy priests.
They generally have the spirit of charity, but not the feeling of
friendship.

I wished to make him suffer, and I succeeded. Spite inspired me. I
behaved as a nobleman might to an inferior. I preserved an excellent
bearing, displayed great attention, much politeness, and an icy
stiffness. I determined to give him no chance to make me blush at
my ignorance, and, to this end, I acted so as to anticipate all his
observations by accusing myself at once of knowing nothing, and by
requesting him to teach me the very rudiments of things. When I had
finished my first lesson I saw in his penetrating eyes, into which I had
managed to penetrate myself, a desire to pass from this coldness to
some sort of intimacy; but I carefully avoided making any response. He
thought to disarm me by praising my attention and intelligence.

“You are troubling yourself unnecessarily, monsieur,” I replied. “I
stand in no need of encouragement. I have not the least faith in my
intelligence, but of my attention I certainly am very sure; but since
it is solely for my own good that I am doing my best to apply myself to
this work, there is no reason why you should compliment me on it.”

With these words I bowed to him and withdrew to my room, where I
immediately did the French exercise that he had set me.

When I went down to luncheon, I saw that Edmee was already aware of the
execution of the promise I had made the previous evening. She at once
greeted me with outstretched hand, and frequently during luncheon called
me her “dear cousin,” till at last M. de la Marche’s face, which was
usually expressionless, expressed surprise or something very near it. I
was hoping that he would take the opportunity to demand an explanation
of my insulting words of the previous day; and although I had resolved
to discuss the matter in a spirit of great moderation, I felt very much
hurt at the care which he took to avoid it. This indifference to an
insult that I had offered implied a sort of contempt, which annoyed
me very much; but the fear of displeasing Edmee gave me strength to
restrain myself.

Incredible as it may seem, my resolve to supplant him was not for one
moment shaken by this humiliating apprenticeship which I had now to
serve before I could manage to obtain the most elementary notions of
things in general. Any other than I, filled like myself with remorse
for wrongs committed, would have found no surer method of repairing them
than by going away, and restoring to Edmee her perfect independence and
absolute peace of mind. This was the only method which did not occur
to me; or if it did, it was rejected with scorn, as a sign of apostasy.
Stubbornness, allied to temerity, ran through my veins with the blood
of the Mauprats. No sooner had I imagined a means of winning her whom
I loved than I embraced it with audacity; and I think it would not have
been otherwise even had her confidences to the abbe in the park shown
me that her love was given to my rival. Such assurance on the part of a
young man who, at the age of seventeen, was taking his first lesson in
French grammar, and who, moreover, had a very exaggerated notion of the
length and difficulty of the studies necessary to put him on a level
with M. de la March, showed, you must allow, a certain moral force.

I do not know if I was happily endowed in the matter of intelligence.
The abbe assured me that I was; but, for my own part, I think that my
rapid progress was due to nothing but my courage. This was such as to
make me presume too much on my physical powers. The abbe had told me
that, with a strong will, any one of my age could master all the rules
of the language within a month. At the end of the month I expressed
myself with facility and wrote correctly. Edmee had a sort of occult
influence over my studies; at her wish I was not taught Latin; for she
declared that I was too old to devote several years to a fancy branch
of learning, and that the essential thing was to shape my heart and
understanding with ideas, rather than to adorn my mind with words.

Of an evening, under pretext of wishing to read some favourite book
again, she read aloud, alternately with the abbe, passages from
Condillac, Fenelon, Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, Jean Jacques, and even
from Montaigne and Montesquieu. These passages, it is true, were chosen
beforehand and adapted to my powers. I understood them fairly well, and
I secretly wondered at this; for if during the day I opened these same
books at random, I found myself brought to a standstill at every line.
With the superstition natural to young lovers, I willingly imagined that
in passing through Edmee’s mouth the authors acquired a magic clearness,
and that by some miracle my mind expanded at the sound of her voice.
However, Edmee was careful to disguise the interest she took in teaching
me herself. There is no doubt that she was mistaken in thinking that
she ought not to betray her solicitude: it would only have roused me to
still greater efforts in my work. But in this, imbued as she was with
the teachings of _Emile_, she was merely putting into practice the
theories of her favourite philosopher.

As it was, I spared myself but little; for my courage would not admit of
any forethought. Consequently I was soon obliged to stop. The change
of air, of diet, and of habits, my lucubrations, the want of vigorous
exercise, my intense application, in a word, the terrible revolution
which my nature had to stir up against itself in order to pass from the
state of a man of the woods to that of an intelligent being, brought on
a kind of brain fever which made me almost mad for some weeks, then an
idiot for some days, and finally disappeared, leaving me a mere wreck
physically, with a mind completely severed from the past, but sternly
braced to meet the future.

One night, when I was at the most critical stage of my illness, during a
lucid interval, I caught sight of Edmee in my room. At first I thought
I was dreaming. The night-light was casting an unsteady glimmer over the
room. Near me was a pale form lying motionless on an easy chair. I could
distinguish some long black tresses falling loosely over a white dress.
I sat up, weak though I was and scarcely able to move, and tried to
get out of bed. Patience, however, suddenly appeared by the bedside and
gently stopped me. Saint-Jean was sleeping in another arm-chair. Every
night there used to be two men watching me thus, ready to hold me down
by force whenever I became violent during my delirium. Frequently the
abbe was one; sometimes the worthy Marcasse, who, before leaving
Berry to go on his annual round through the neighbouring province, had
returned to have a farewell hunt in the outhouses of the chateau, and
who kindly offered to relieve the servants in their painful task of
keeping watch over me.

As I was wholly unconscious of my illness, it was but natural that
the unexpected presence of the hermit in my room should cause me
considerable astonishment, and throw me into a state of great agitation.
My attacks had been so violent that evening that I had no strength left.
I abandoned myself, therefore, to my melancholy ravings, and, taking the
good man’s hand, I asked him if it was really Edmee’s corpse that he had
placed in the arm-chair by my bedside.

“It is Edmee’s living self,” he answered, in a low voice; “but she is
still asleep, my dear monsieur, and we must not wake her. If there is
anything you would like, I am here to attend to you, and right gladly I
do it.”

“My good Patience, you are deceiving me,” I said; “she is dead, and
so am I, and you have come to bury us. But you must put us in the same
coffin, do you hear? for we are betrothed. Where is her ring? Take it
off and put it on my finger; our wedding-night has come.”

He tried in vain to dispel this hallucination. I held to my belief that
Edmee was dead, and declared that I should never be quiet in my shroud
until I had been given my wife’s ring. Edmee, who had sat up with me
for several nights, was so exhausted that our voices did not awaken
her. Besides, I was speaking in a whisper, like Patience, with that
instinctive tendency to imitate which is met with only in children or
idiots. I persisted in my fancy, and Patience, who was afraid that it
might turn into madness, went and very carefully removed a cornelian
ring from one of Edmee’s fingers and put it on mine. As soon as I felt
it there, I carried it to my lips; and then with my arms crossed on my
breast, in the manner of a corpse in a coffin, I fell into a deep sleep.

On the morrow when they tried to take the ring from me I resisted
violently, and they abandoned the attempt. I fell asleep again and the
abbe removed it during my sleep. But when I opened my eyes I noticed the
theft, and once more began to rave. Edmee, who was in the room, ran
to me at once and pressed the ring over my finger, at the same time
rebuking the abbe. I immediately grew calm, and gazing, on her with
lack-lustre eyes, said:

“Is it not true that you are my wife in death as in life?”

“Certainly,” she replied. “Set your mind at rest.”

“Eternity is long,” I said, “and I should like to spend it in recalling
your caresses. But I send my thoughts back in vain; they bring me no
remembrance of your love.”

She leant over and gave me a kiss.

“Edmee, that is very wrong,” said the abbe; “such remedies turn to
poison.”

“Let me do as I like, abbe,” she replied, with evident impatience,
sitting down near my bed; “I must ask you to let me do as I please.”

I fell asleep with one of my hands in hers, repeating at intervals:

“How sweet it is in the grave! Are we not fortunate to be dead?”

During my convalescence Edmee was much more reserved, but no less
attentive. I told her my dreams and learnt from her how far my
recollections were of real events. Without her testimony I should always
have believed that I had dreamt everything. I implored her to let me
keep the ring, and she consented. I ought to have added, to show my
gratitude for all her goodness, that I should keep it as a pledge of
friendship, and not as a sign of our engagement; but such a renunciation
was beyond me.

One day I asked for news of M. de la Marche. It was only to Patience
that I dared to put this question.

“Gone,” he answered.

“What! Gone?” I replied. “For long?”

“Forever, please God! I don’t know anything about it, for I ask no
questions; but I happened to be in the garden when he took leave of her,
and it was all as cold as a December night. Still, _au revoir_ was
said on both sides, but though Edmee’s manner was kind and honest as
it always is, the other had the face of a farmer when he sees frosts
in April. Mauprat, Mauprat, they tell me that you have become a great
student and a genuine good fellow. Remember what I told you; when you
are old there will probably no longer be any titles or estate. Perhaps
you will be called ‘Father’ Mauprat, as I am called ‘Father’ Patience,
though I have never been either a priest or a father of a family.”

“Well, what are you driving at?”

“Remember what I once told you,” he repeated. “There are many ways of
being a sorcerer, and one may read the future without being a servant
of the devil. For my part, I give my consent to your marriage with your
cousin. Continue to behave decently. You are a wise man now, and can
read fluently from any book set before you. What more do you want? There
are so many books here that the sweat runs from my brow at the very
sight of them; it seems as if I were again starting the old torment of
not being able to learn to read. But you have soon cured yourself. If M.
Hubert were willing to take my advice, he would fix the wedding for the
next Martinmas.”

“That is enough, Patience!” I said. “This is a painful subject with me;
my cousin does not love me.”

“I tell you she does. You lie in your throat, as the nobles say. I know
well enough how she nursed you; and Marcasse from the housetop happened
to look through her window and saw her on her knees in the middle of the
room at five o’clock in the morning the day that you were so ill.”

These imprudent assertions of Patience, Edmee’s tender cares, the
departure of M. de la Marche, and, more than anything else, the weakness
of my brain, enabled me to believe what I wished; but in proportion as
I regained my strength Edmee withdrew further and further within the
bounds of calm and discreet friendship. Never did man recover his
health with less pleasure than I mine; for each day made Edmee’s visits
shorter; and when I was able to leave my room I had merely a few hours a
day near her, as before my illness. With marvellous skill she had given
me proof of the tenderest affection without ever allowing herself to be
drawn into a fresh explanation concerning our mysterious betrothal. If I
had not yet sufficient greatness of soul to renounce my rights, I had at
least developed enough honour not to refer to them; and I found myself
on exactly the same terms with her as at the time when I had fallen ill.
M. de la Marche was in Paris; but according to her he had been summoned
thither by his military duties and ought to return at the end of the
winter on which we were entering. Nothing that the chevalier or the abbe
said tended to show that there had been a quarrel between Edmee and him.
They rarely spoke of the lieutenant-general, but when they had to speak
of him they did so naturally and without any signs of repugnance. I
was again filled with my old doubts, and could find no remedy for them
except in the kingdom of my own will. “I will force her to prefer me,” I
would say to myself as I raised my eyes from my book and watched Edmee’s
great, inscrutable eyes calmly fixed on the letters which her father
occasionally received from M. de la Marche, and which he would hand to
her as soon as he had read them. I buried myself in my work again. For
a long time I suffered from frightful pains in the head, but I overcame
them stoically. Edmee again began the course of studies which she had
indirectly laid down for my winter evenings. Once more I astonished the
abbe by my aptitude and the rapidity of my conquests. The kindness he
had shown me during my illness had disarmed me; and although I was still
unable to feel any genuine affection for him, knowing well that he was
of little service to me with my cousin, I gave him proof of much more
confidence and respect than in the past. His talks were as useful to me
as my reading. I was allowed to accompany him in his walks in the park
and in his philosophical visits to Patience’s snow-covered hut. This
gave me an opportunity of seeing Edmee more frequently and for longer
periods. My behaviour was such that all her mistrust vanished, and she
no longer feared to be alone with me. On such occasions, however, I
had but little scope for displaying my heroism; for the abbe, whose
vigilance nothing could lull to sleep, was always at our heels. This
supervision no longer annoyed me; on the contrary, I was pleased at it;
for, in spite of all my resolutions, the storms of passion would still
sweep my senses into a mysterious disorder; and once or twice when I
found myself alone with Edmee I left her abruptly and went away, so that
she might not perceive my agitation.

Our life, then, was apparently calm and peaceful, and for some time
it was so in reality; but soon I disturbed it more than ever by a vice
which education developed in me, and which had hitherto been hidden
under coarser but less fatal vices. This vice, the bane of my new period
of life, was vanity.

In spite of their theories, the abbe and my cousin made the mistake
of showing too much pleasure at my rapid progress. They had so little
expected perseverance from me that they gave all the credit to my
exceptional abilities. Perhaps, too, in the marked success of the
philosophical ideas they had applied to my education they saw something
of a triumph for themselves. Certain it is, I was not loath to let
myself be persuaded that I had great intellectual powers, and that I
was a man very much above the average. My dear instructors were soon to
gather the sad fruit of their imprudence, and it was already too late to
check the flight of my immoderate conceit.

Perhaps, too, this abominable trait in my character, kept under by the
bad treatment I had endured in childhood, was now merely revealing its
existence. There is reason to believe that we carry within us from our
earliest years the seeds of those virtues and vices which are in time
made to bear fruit by the action of our environment. As for myself, I
had not yet found anything whereon my vanity could feed; for on what
could I have prided myself at the beginning of my acquaintance with
Edmee? But no sooner was food forthcoming than suffering vanity rose up
in triumph, and filled me with as much presumption as previously it had
inspired me with bashfulness and boorish reserve. I was, moreover, as
delighted at being able at last to express my thoughts with ease as a
young falcon fresh from the nest trying its wings for the first time.
Consequently, I became as talkative as I had been silent. The others
were too indulgent to my prattle. I had not sense enough to see that
they were merely listening to me as they would to a spoilt child.
I thought myself a man, and what is more, a remarkable man. I grew
arrogant and superlatively ridiculous.

My uncle, the chevalier, who had not taken any part in my education, and
who only smiled with fatherly good-nature at the first steps I took in
my new career, was the first to notice the false direction in which I
was advancing. He found it unbecoming that I should raise my voice
as loudly as his own, and mentioned the matter to Edmee. With great
sweetness she warned me of this, and, lest I should feel annoyed at her
speaking of it, told me that I was quite right in my argument, but that
her father was now too old to be converted to new ideas, and that I
ought to sacrifice my enthusiastic affirmations to his patriarchal
dignity. I promised not to repeat the offence; and I did not keep my
word.

The fact is, the chevalier was imbued with many prejudices. Considering
the days in which he lived, he had received a very good education for a
country nobleman; but the century had moved more rapidly than he. Edmee,
ardent and romantic; the abbe, full of sentiment and systems, had moved
even more rapidly than the century; and if the vast gulf which lay
between them and the patriarch was scarcely perceptible, this was owing
to the respect which they rightly felt for him, and to the love he had
for his daughter. I rushed forward at full speed, as you may imagine,
into Edmee’s ideas, but I had not, like herself, sufficient delicacy of
feeling to maintain a becoming reticence. The violence of my character
found an outlet in politics and philosophy, and I tasted unspeakable
pleasure in those heated disputes which at that time in France, not
only at all public meetings but also in the bosoms of families, were
preluding the tempests of the Revolution. I doubt if there was a single
house, from palace to hovel, which had not its orator--rugged, fiery,
absolute, and ready to descend into the parliamentary arena. I was the
orator of the chateau of Sainte-Severe, and my worthy uncle, accustomed
to a resemblance of authority over those about him, which prevented him
from seeing the real revolt of their minds, could ill endure such candid
opposition as mine. He was proud and hot-tempered, and, moreover, had a
difficulty in expressing himself which increased his natural impatience,
and made him feel annoyed with himself. He would give a furious kick to
the burning logs on the hearth; he would smash his eye-glasses into a
thousand pieces; scatter clouds of snuff about the floor, and shout so
violently as to make the lofty ceilings of his mansion ring with his
resonant voice. All this, I regret to say, amused me immensely; and with
some sentence but newly spelt out from my books I loved to destroy the
frail scaffolding of ideas which had served him all his life. This was
great folly and very foolish pride on my part; but my love of opposition
and my desire to display intellectually the energy which was wanting in
my physical life were continually carrying me away. In vain would Edmee
cough, as a hint that I should say no more, and make an effort to save
her father’s _amour propre_ by bringing forward some argument in his
favour, though against her own judgement; the lukewarmness of her help,
and my apparent submission to her only irritated my adversary more and
more.

“Let him have his say,” he would cry; “Edmee, you must not interfere; I
want to beat him on all points. If you continually interrupt us, I shall
never be able to make him see his absurdity.”

And then the squall would blow stronger from both sides, until at last
the chevalier, seriously offended, would walk out of the room, and go
and vent his ill-humour on his huntsman or his hounds.

What most contributed to the recurrence of these unseemly wrangles and
to the growth of my ridiculous obstinacy was my uncle’s extreme goodness
and the rapidity of his recovery. At the end of an hour he had entirely
forgotten my rudeness and his own irritation. He would speak to me as
usual and inquire into all my wishes and all my wants with that fatherly
solicitude which always kept him in a benevolent mood. This incomparable
man could never had slept had he not, before going to bed, embraced all
his family, and atoned, either by a word or a kindly glance, for any
ebullitions of temper which the meanest of his servants might have had
to bear during the day. Such goodness ought to have disarmed me and
closed my mouth forever. Each evening I vowed that it should; but each
morning I returned, as the Scriptures say, to my vomit again.

Edmee suffered more and more every day from this development of my
character. She cast about for means to cure it. If there was never
_fiancee_ stronger-minded and more reserved than she, never was there
mother more tender. After many discussions with the abbe she resolved to
persuade her father to change the routine of our life somewhat, and to
remove our establishment to Paris for the last weeks of the carnival.
Our long stay in the country; the isolation which the position of
Sainte-Severe and the bad state of the roads had left us since the
beginning of winter; the monotony of our daily life--all tended to
foster our wearisome quibbling. My character was being more and more
spoilt by it; and though it afforded my uncle even greater pleasure than
myself, his health suffered as a result, and the childish passions daily
aroused were no doubt hastening his decay. The abbe was suffering from
_ennui_; Edmee was depressed. Whether in consequence of our mode of life
or owing to causes unknown to the rest, it was her wish to go, and we
went; for her father was uneasy about her melancholy, and sought only to
do as she desired. I jumped for joy at the thought of seeing Paris; and
while Edmee was flattering herself that intercourse with the world
would refine the grossness of my pedantry, I was dreaming of a triumphal
progress through the world which had been held up to such scorn by our
philosophers. We started on our journey one fine morning in March; the
chevalier with his daughter and Mademoiselle Leblanc in one post-chaise;
myself in another with the abbe, who could ill conceal his delight at
the thought of seeing the capital for the first time in him life; and my
valet Saint-Jean, who, lest he should forget his customary politeness,
made profound bows to every individual we passed.




XII

Old Bernard, tired from talking so long, had promised to resume his
story on the morrow. At the appointed hour we called upon him to keep
his word; and he continued thus:


This visit marked a new phase in my life. At Sainte-Severe I had been
absorbed in my love and my work. I had concentrated all my energies upon
these two points. No sooner had I arrived at Paris than a thick curtain
seemed to fall before my eyes, and, for several days, as I could not
understand anything, I felt astonished at nothing. I formed a very
exaggerated estimate of the passing actors who appeared upon the scene;
but I formed no less exaggerated an estimate of the ease with which
I should soon rival these imaginary powers. My enterprising and
presumptuous nature saw challenges everywhere and obstacles nowhere.

Though I was in the same house as my uncle and cousin, my room was on a
separate floor, and henceforth I spent the greater part of my time with
the abbe. I was far from being dazed by the material advantages of my
position; but in proportion as I realized how precarious or painful were
the positions of many others, the more conscious I became of the comfort
of my own. I appreciated the excellent character of my tutor, and the
respect my lackey showed me no longer seemed objectionable. With the
freedom that I enjoyed, and the unlimited money at my command, and the
restless energy of youth, it is astonishing that I did not fall into
some excess, were it only gambling, which might well have appealed to
my combative instincts. It was my own ignorance of everything that
prevented this; it made me extremely suspicious, and the abbe, who was
very observant, and held himself responsible for my actions, managed
most cleverly to work upon my haughty reserve. He increased it in regard
to such things as might have done me harm, and dispelled it in contrary
cases. Moreover, he was careful to provide me with sufficient reasonable
distractions, which while they could not take the place of the joys
of love, served at least to lessen the smart of its wounds. As to
temptations to debauchery, I felt none. I had too much pride to yearn
for any woman in which I had not seen, as in Edmee, the first of her
sex.

We used all to meet at dinner, and as a rule we paid visits in the
evening. By observing the world from a corner of a drawing-room, I
learnt more of it in a few days than I should have done in a whole
year from guesses and inquiries. I doubt whether I should ever have
understood society, if I had always been obliged to view it from a
certain distance. My brain refused to form a clear image of the ideas
which occupied the brains of others. But as soon as I found myself in
the midst of this chaos, the confused mass was compelled to fall into
some sort of order and reveal a large part of its elements. This path
which led me into life was not without charms for me, I remember, at its
beginning. Amid all the conflicting interests of the surrounding world I
had nothing to ask for, aim at, or argue about. Fortune had taken me by
the hand. One fine morning she had lifted me out of an abyss and put me
down on a bed of roses and made me a young gentleman. The eagerness of
others was for me but an amusing spectacle. My heart was interested
in the future only on one mysterious point, the love which I felt for
Edmee.

My illness, far from robbing me of my physical vigour, had but increased
it. I was no longer the heavy, sleepy animal, fatigued by digestion and
stupefied by weariness. I felt the vibrations of all my fibres filling
my soul with unknown harmonies; and I was astonished to discover within
myself faculties of which I had never suspected the use. My good kinfolk
were delighted at this, though apparently not surprised. They had
allowed themselves to augur so well of me from the beginning that it
seemed as if they had been accustomed all their lives to the trade of
civilizing barbarians.

The nervous system which had just been developed in me, and which made
me pay for the pleasures and advantages it brought by keen and constant
sufferings during the rest of my life, had rendered me specially
sensitive to impressions from without; and this quickness to feel the
effect of external things was helped by an organic vigour such as is
only found among animals or savages. I was astounded at the decay of
the faculties in other people. These men in spectacles, these women with
their sense of smell deadened by snuff, these premature graybeards,
deaf and gouty before their time, were painful to behold. To me society
seemed like a vast hospital; and when with my robust constitution I
found myself in the midst of these weaklings, it seemed to me that with
a puff of my breath I could have blown them into the air as if they had
been so much thistle-down.

This unfortunately led me into the error of yielding to that rather
stupid kind of pride which makes a man presume upon his natural gifts.
For a long time it induced me to neglect their real improvement, as if
this were a work of supererogation. The idea that gradually grew up in
me of the worthlessness of my fellows prevented me from rising above
those whom I henceforth looked upon as my inferiors. I did not
realize that society is made up of so many elements of little value in
themselves, but so skilfully and solidly put together that before adding
the least extraneous particle a man must be a qualified artificer. I did
not know that in this society there is no resting-place between the role
of the great artist and that of the good workman. Now, I was neither one
nor the other, and, if the truth must be told, all my ideas have never
succeeded in lifting me out of the ordinary ruck; all my strength has
only enabled me with much difficulty to do as others do.

In a few weeks, then, I passed from an excess of admiration to an excess
of contempt for society. As soon as I understood the workings of its
springs they seemed to me so miserably regulated by a feeble generation
that the hopes of my mentors, unknown to themselves, were doomed to
disappointment. Instead of realizing my own inferiority and endeavouring
to efface myself in the crowd, I imagined that I could give proof of
my superiority whenever I wished; and I fed on fancies which I blush to
recall. If I did not show myself egregiously ridiculous, it was thanks
to the very excess of this vanity which feared to stultify itself before
others.

At that time Paris presented a spectacle which I shall not attempt to
set before you, because no doubt you have often eagerly studied it in
the excellent pictures which have been painted by eye-witnesses in the
form of general history or private memoirs. Besides, such a picture
would exceed the limits of my story, for I promised to tell you only the
cardinal events in my moral and philosophical development. In order to
give you some idea of the workings of my mind at this period it will
suffice to mention that the War of Independence was breaking out in
America; that Voltaire was receiving his apotheosis in Paris; that
Franklin, the prophet of a new political religion, was sowing the seed
of liberty in the very heart of the Court of France; while Lafayette
was secretly preparing his romantic expedition. The majority of young
patricians were being carried away either by fashion, or the love
of change, or the pleasure inherent in all opposition which is not
dangerous.

Opposition took a graver form and called for more serious work in the
case of the old nobles, and among the members of the parliaments. The
spirit of the League was alive again in the ranks of these ancient
patricians and these haughty magistrates, who for form’s sake were still
supporting the tottering monarchy with one arm, while with the other
they gave considerable help to the invasions of philosophy. The
privileged classes of society were zealously lending a hand to the
imminent destruction of their privileges by complaining that these had
been curtailed by the kings. They were bringing up their children in
constitutional principles, because they imagined they were going to
found a new monarchy in which the people would help them to regain
their old position above the throne; and it is for this reason that the
greatest admiration for Voltaire and the most ardent sympathies with
Franklin were openly expressed in the most famous salons in Paris.

So unusual and, if it must be said, so unnatural a movement of the human
mind had infused fresh life into the vestiges of the Court of Louis
XIV, and replaced the customary coldness and stiffness by a sort of
quarrelsome vivacity. It had also introduced certain serious forms into
the frivolous manners of the regency, and lent them an appearance of
depth. The pure but colourless life of Louis XVI counted for nothing,
and influenced nobody. Never had there been such serious chatter, so
many flimsy maxims, such an affectation of wisdom, so much inconsistency
between words and deeds as might have been found at this period among
the so-called enlightened classes.

It was necessary to remind you of this in order that you might
understand the admiration which I had at first for a world apparently
so disinterested, so courageous, so eager in the pursuit of truth, and
likewise the disgust which I was soon to feel for so much affectation
and levity, for such an abuse of the most hallowed words and the most
sacred convictions. For my own part, I was perfectly sincere; and I
founded my philosophic fervour (that recently discovered sentiment of
liberty which was then called the cult of reason) on the broad base of
an inflexible logic. I was young and of a good constitution, the first
condition perhaps of a healthy mind; my reading, though not extensive,
was solid, for I had been fed on food easy of digestion. The little I
knew served to show me, therefore, that others either knew nothing at
all, or were giving themselves the lie.

At the commencement of our stay in Paris the chevalier had but few
visitors. The friend and contemporary of Turgot and several other
distinguished men, he had not mixed with the gilded youth of his day,
but had lived soberly in the country after loyally serving in the wars.
His circle of friends, therefore, was composed of a few grave gentlemen
of the long robe, several old soldiers, and a few nobles from his own
province, both old and young, who, thanks to a respectable fortune,
were able, like himself, to come and spend the winter in Paris. He had,
moreover, kept up a slight intercourse with a more brilliant set, among
whom Edmee’s beauty and refined manners were noticed as soon as she
appeared. Being an only daughter, and passably rich, she was sought
after by various important matrons, those procuresses of quality who
have always a few young proteges whom they wish to clear from debt at
the expense of some family in the provinces. And then, when it became
known that she was engaged to M. de la Marche, the almost ruined scion
of a very illustrious family, she was still more kindly received, until
by degrees the little salon which she had chosen for her father’s old
friends became too small for the wits by quality and profession, and
the grand ladies with a turn for philosophy who wished to know the young
Quakeress, the Rose of Berry (such were the names given her by a certain
fashionable woman).

This rapid success in a world in which she had hitherto been unknown by
no mean dazzled Edmee; and the control which she possessed over herself
was so great that, in spite of all the anxiety with which I watched
her slightest movement, I could never discover if she felt flattered at
causing such a stir. But what I could perceive was the admirable good
sense manifested in everything she did and everything she said. Her
manner, at once ingenuous and reserved, and a certain blending of
unconstraint with modest pride, made her shine even among the women who
were the most admired and the most skilled in attracting attention. And
this is the place to mention that at first I was extremely shocked at
the tone and bearing of these women, whom everybody extolled; to me
they seemed ridiculous in their studied posings, and their grand society
manners looked very much like insufferable effrontery. Yes, I, so
intrepid at heart, and but lately so coarse in my manners, felt ill at
ease and abashed in their presence; and it needed all Edmee’s reproaches
and remonstrances to prevent me from displaying a profound contempt for
this meretriciousness of glances, of toilets, and allurements which
was known in society as allowable coquetry, as the charming desire to
please, as amiability, and as grace. The abbe was of my opinion. When
the guests had gone we members of the family used to gather round the
fireside for a short while before separating. It is at such a time that
one feels an impulse to bring together one’s scattered impressions and
communicate them to some sympathetic being. The abbe, then, would break
the same lances as myself with my uncle and cousin. The chevalier, who
was an ardent admirer of the fair sex, of which he had had but little
experience, used to take upon himself, like a true French knight, to
defend all the beauties that we were attacking so unmercifully. He would
laughingly accuse the abbe of arguing about women as the fox in the
fable argued about the grapes. For myself, I used to improve under the
abbe’s criticisms; this was an emphatic way of letting Edmee know how
much I preferred her to all others. She, however, appeared to be more
scandalized than flattered, and seriously reproved me for the tendency
to malevolence which had its origin, she said, in my inordinate pride.

It is true that after generously undertaking the defence of the persons
in question, she would come over to our opinion as soon as, Rousseau in
hand, we told her that the women in Paris society had cavalier manners
and a way of looking a man in the face which must needs be intolerable
in the eyes of a sage. When once Rousseau had delivered judgment,
Edmee would object no further; she was ready to admit with him that the
greatest charm of a woman is the intelligent and modest attention she
gives to serious discussions, and I always used to remind her of the
comparison of a superior woman to a beautiful child with its great eyes
full of feeling and sweetness and delicacy, with its shy questionings
and its objections full of sense. I hoped that she would recognise
herself in this portrait upon the text, and, enlarging the portrait:

“A really superior woman,” I said, looking at her earnestly, “is one
who knows enough to prevent her from asking a ridiculous or unseasonable
question, or from ever measuring swords with men of merit. Such a woman
knows when to be silent, especially with the fools whom she could laugh
at, or the ignorant whom she could humiliate. She is indulgent towards
absurdities because she does not yearn to display her knowledge, and
she is observant of whatsoever is good, because she desires to improve
herself. Her great object is to understand, not to instruct. The great
art (since it is recognised that art is required even in the commerce of
words) is not to pit against one another two arrogant opponents,
eager to parade their learning and to amuse the company by discussing
questions the solution of which no one troubles about, but to illumine
every unprofitable disputation by bringing in the help of all who can
throw a little light on the points at issue. This is a talent of which
I can see no signs among the hostesses who are so cried up. In their
houses I always find two fashionable barristers, and a thunderstruck
audience, in which no one dares to be judge. The only art these ladies
have is to make the man of genius ridiculous, and the ordinary man dumb
and inert. One comes away from such houses saying, ‘Those were fine
speeches,’ and nothing more.”

I really think that I was in the right here; but I cannot forget that my
chief cause of anger against these women arose from the fact that they
paid no attention to people, however able they might think themselves,
unless they happened to be famous--the _people_ being myself, as you may
easily imagine. On the other hand, now that I look back on those days
without prejudice and without any sense of wounded vanity, I am certain
that these women had a way of fawning on public favourites which was
much more like childish conceit than sincere admiration or candid
sympathy. They became editors, as it were, of the conversation,
listening with all their might and making peremptory signals to the
audience to listen to every triviality issuing from an illustrious
mouth; while they would suppress a yawn and drum with their fans at
all remarks, however excellent, as soon as they were unsigned by a
fashionable name. I am ignorant of the airs of the intellectual women
of the nineteenth century; nay, I do not know if the race still exists.
Thirty years have passed since I mixed in society; but, as to the past,
you may believe what I tell you. There were five or six of these
women who were absolutely odious to me. One of them had some wit, and
scattered her epigrams right and left. These were at once hawked about
in all drawing-rooms, and I had to listen to them twenty times in a
single day. Another had read Montesquieu, and gave lessons in law to the
oldest magistrates. A third used to play the harp execrably, but it was
agreed that her arms were the most beautiful in France, and we had to
endure the harsh scraping of her nails over the strings so that she
might have an opportunity of removing her gloves like a coy little girl.
What can I say of the others, except that they vied with one another in
all those affectations and fatuous insincerities, by which all the men
childishly allowed themselves to be duped. One alone was really pretty,
said nothing, and gave pleasure by her very lack of artificiality. To
her I might have been favourably inclined because of her ignorance, had
she not gloried in this, and tried to emphasize her difference from the
others by a piquant ingenuousness. One day I discovered that she had
plenty of wit, and straightway I abhorred her.

Edmee alone preserved all the freshness of sincerity and all the
distinction of natural grace. Sitting on a sofa by the side of M. de
Malesherbes, she was for me the same being that I had gazed on so many
times in the light of the setting sun, as she sat on the stone seat at
the door of Patience’s cottage.




XIII

You will readily believe that all the homage paid to my cousin fanned
into fresh flames the jealousy which had been smouldering in my breast.
Since the day when, in obedience to her command, I began to devote
myself to work, I could hardly say whether I had dared to count on
her promise that she would become my wife as soon as I was able to
understand her ideas and feelings. To me, indeed, it seemed that the
time for this had already arrived; for it is certain that I understood
Edmee, better perhaps than any of the men who were paying their
addresses to her in prose and verse. I had firmly resolved not to
presume upon the oath extorted from her at Roche-Mauprat; yet, when I
remembered her last promise, freely given at the chapel window, and the
inferences which I could have drawn from her conversation with the abbe
which I had overheard in the parlour at Sainte-Severe; when I remembered
her earnestness in preventing me from going away and in directing my
education; the motherly attentions she had lavished on me during my
illness--did not all these things give me, if not some right, at least
some reason to hope? It is true that her friendship would become icy as
soon as my passion betrayed itself in words or looks; it is true that
since the first day I saw her I had not advanced a single step towards
close affection; it is also true that M. de la Marche frequently came to
the house, and that she always showed him as much friendship as myself,
though with less familiarity and more respect in it, a distinction which
was naturally due to the difference in our characters and our ages, and
did not indicate any preference for one or the other. It was possible,
therefore, to attribute her promise to the prompting of her conscience;
the interest which she took in my studies to her worship of human
dignity as it stood rehabilitated by philosophy; her quiet and continued
affection for M. de la March to a profound regret, kept in subjection
by the strength and wisdom of her mind. These perplexities I felt very
acutely. The hope of compelling her love by submission and devotion had
sustained me; but this hope was beginning to grow weak; for though, as
all allowed, I had made prodigious efforts and extraordinary progress,
Edmee’s regard for me had been very far from increasing in the same
proportion. She had not shown any astonishment at what she called my
lofty intellect; she had always believed in it; she had praised it
unreasonably. But she was not blind to the faults in my character,
to the vices of my soul. She had reproached me with these with an
inexorable sweetness, with a patience calculated to drive me to despair;
for she seemed to have made up her mind that, whatever the future might
bring, she would never love me more and never less.

Meanwhile all were paying court to her and none were accepted. It had,
indeed, been given out that she was engaged to M. de la Marche, but no
one understood any better than myself the indefinite postponement of the
marriage. People came to the conclusion that she was seeking a pretext
to get rid of him, and they could find no ground for her repugnance
except by supposing that she had conceived a great passion for myself.
My strange history had caused some stir; the women examined me with
curiosity; the men seemed interested in me and showed me a sort of
respect which I affected to despise, but to which, however, I was far
from insensible. And, since nothing finds credence in the world until it
is embellished with some fiction, people strangely exaggerated my wit,
my capabilities and my learning; but, as soon as they had seen M. de
la Marche and myself in Edmee’s company, all their inferences were
annihilated by the composure and ease of our manners. To both of us
Edmee was the same in public as in private; M. de la Marche, a soulless
puppet, was perfectly drilled in conventional manners; and myself, a
prey to divers passions, but inscrutable by reason of my pride and also,
I must confess, of my pretensions to the sublimity of the _American
manner_. I should tell you that I had been fortunate enough to be
introduced to Franklin as a sincere devotee of liberty. Sir Arthur
Lee had honoured me with a certain kindness and some excellent advice;
consequently my head was somewhat turned, even as the heads of those
whom I railed at so bitterly were turned, and to such an extent that
this little vainglory brought sorely needed relief to my agonies of
mind. Perhaps you will shrug your shoulders when I own that I took the
greatest pleasure in the world in leaving my hair unpowdered, in
wearing big shoes, and appearing everywhere in a dark-coloured coat, of
aggressively simple cut and stiffly neat--in a word, in aping, as far as
was then permissible without being mistaken for a regular plebeian, the
dress and ways of the Bonhomme Richard! I was nineteen, and I was living
in an age when every one affected a part--that is my only excuse.

I might plead also that my too indulgent and too simple tutor openly
approved of my conduct; that my Uncle Hubert, though he occasionally
laughed at me, let me do as I wished, and that Edmee said absolutely
nothing about this ridiculous affectation, and appeared never to notice
it.

Meanwhile spring had returned; we were going back to the country; the
salons were being gradually deserted. For myself, I was still in the
same state of uncertainty. I noticed one day that M. de la Marche seemed
anxious to find an opportunity of speaking to Edmee in private. At first
I found pleasure in making him suffer, and did not stir from my chair.
However, I thought I detected on Edmee’s brow that slight frown which I
knew so well, and after a silent dialogue with myself I went out of the
room, resolving to observe the results of this _tete-a-tete_, and to
learn my fate, whatever it might be.

At the end of an hour I returned to the drawing-room. My uncle was
there; M. de la Marche was staying to dinner; Edmee seemed meditative
but not melancholy; the abbe’s eyes were putting questions to her which
she did not understand, or did not wish to understand.

M. de la Marche accompanied my uncle to the Comedie Francaise. Edmee
said that she had some letters to write and requested permission to
remain at home. I followed the count and the chevalier, but after the
first act I made my escape and returned to the house. Edmee had given
orders that she was not to be disturbed; but I did not consider that
this applied to myself; the servants thought it quite natural that
I should behave as the son of the house. I entered the drawing-room,
fearful lest Edmee should have retired to her bed-room; for there I
could not have followed her. She was sitting near the fire and amusing
herself by pulling out the petals of the blue and white asters which I
had gathered during a walk to the tomb of Jean Jacques Rousseau.
These flowers brought back to me a night of ecstasy, under the clear
moonlight, the only hours of happiness, perhaps, that I could mention in
all my life.

“Back already?” she said, without any change of attitude.

“Already is an unkind word,” I replied. “Would you like me to retire to
my room, Edmee?”

“By no means; you are not disturbing me at all; but you would have
derived more profit from seeing _Merope_ than from listening to my
conversation this evening; for I warn you that I feel a complete idiot.”

“So much the better, cousin; I shall not feel humiliated this evening,
since for the first time we shall be upon a footing of equality. But,
might I ask you why you so despise my asters? I thought that you would
probably keep them as a souvenir.”

“Of Rousseau?” she asked with a malicious little smile, and without
raising her eyes to mine.

“Naturally that was my meaning,” I answered.

“I am playing a most interesting game,” she said; “do not interrupt me.”

“I know it,” I said. “All the children in Varenne play it, and there is
not a lass but believes in the decree of fate that it revels. Would
you like me to read your thoughts as you pull out these petals four by
four?”

“Come, then, O mighty magician!”

“A little, that is how some one loves you; much, that is how you love
him; passionately, that is how another loves you; not at all, thus do
you love this other.”

“And might I inquire, Sir Oracle,” replied Edmee, whose face became more
serious, “who some one and another may be? I suspect that you are like
the Pythonesses of old; you do not know the meaning of your auguries
yourself.”

“Could you not guess mine, Edmee?”

“I will try to interpret the riddle, if you will promise that afterward
you will do what the Sphinx did when vanquished by OEdipus.”

“Oh, Edmee,” I cried; “think how long I have been running my head
against walls on account of you and your interpretations. And yet you
have not guessed right a single time.”

“Oh, good heavens! I have,” she said, throwing the bouquet on to the
mantel-piece. “You shall see. I love M. de la Marche a little, and I
love you much. He loves me passionately, and you love me not at all.
That is the truth.”

“I forgive you this malicious interpretation with all my heart for the
sake of the word ‘much,’” I replied.

I tried to take her hands. She drew them away quickly, though, in fact,
she had no need to fear; for had she given me them, I merely intended to
press them in brotherly fashion; but this appearance of distrust aroused
memories which were dangerous for me. I fancy she showed a great deal of
coquetry that evening in her expression and manners; and, until then,
I had never seen the least inclination toward it. I felt my courage
rising, though I could not explain why; and I ventured on some pointed
remarks about her interview with M. de la Marche. She made no effort
to deny my interpretations, and began to laugh when I told her that she
ought to thank me for my exquisite politeness in retiring as soon as I
saw her knit her brow.

Her supercilious levity was beginning to irritate me a little, when
a servant entered and handed her a letter, saying that some one was
waiting for an answer.

“Go to my writing-table and cut a pen for me, please,” she said to me.

With an air of unconcern she broke the seal and ran through the letter,
while I, quite ignorant of the contents, began preparing her writing
materials.

For some time the crow-quill had been cut ready for use; for some time
the paper with its coloured vignette had been waiting by the side of
the amber writing-case; yet Edmee paid no attention to them and made no
attempt to use them. The letter lay open in her lap; her feet were
on the fire-dogs, her elbows on the arm of her chair in her favourite
attitude of meditation. She was completely absorbed. I spoke to her
softly; she did not hear me. I thought that she had forgotten the letter
and had fallen asleep. After a quarter of an hour the servant came back
and said that the messenger wished to know if there was any answer.

“Certainly,” she replied; “ask him to wait.”

She read the letter again with the closest attention, and began to
write slowly; then she threw her reply into the fire, pushed away the
arm-chair with her foot, walked round the room a few times, and suddenly
stopped in front of me and looked at me in a cold, hard manner.

“Edmee,” I cried, springing to me feet, “what is the matter, and how
does that letter which is worrying you so much concern myself?”

“What is that to you?” she replied.

“What is that to me?” I cried. “And what is the air I breathe to me? and
what is the blood that flows in my veins? Ask me that, if you like, but
do not ask how one of your words or one of your glances can concern me;
for you know very well that my life depends on them.”

“Do not talk nonsense now, Bernard,” she answered, returning to her
arm-chair in a distracted manner. “There is a time for everything.”

“Edmee, Edmee! do not play with the sleeping lion, do not stir up the
fire which is smouldering in the ashes.”

She shrugged her shoulders, and began to write with great rapidity. Her
face was flushed, and from time to time she passed her fingers through
the long hair which fell in ringlets over her shoulders. She was
dangerously beautiful in her agitation; she looked as if in love--but
with whom? Doubtless with him to whom she was writing. I began to feel
the fires of jealousy. I walked out of the room abruptly and crossed the
hall. I looked at the man who had brought the letter; he was in M. de la
Marche’s livery. I had no further doubts; this, however, only increased
my rage. I returned to the drawing-room and threw open the door
violently. Edmee did not even turn her head; she continued writing. I
sat down opposite her, and stared at her with flashing eyes. She did
not deign to raise her own to mine. I even fancied that I noticed on
her ruby lips the dawn of a smile which seemed an insult to my agony.
At last she finished her letter and sealed it. I rose and walked towards
her, feeling strongly tempted to snatch it from her hands. I had learnt
to control myself somewhat better than of old; but I realized how, with
passionate souls, a single instant may destroy the labours of many days.

“Edmee,” I said to her, in a bitter tone, and with a frightful grimace
that was intended to be a sarcastic smile, “would you like me to hand
this letter to M. de la Marche’s lackey, and at the same time tell him
in a whisper at what time his master may come to the tryst?”

“It seems to me,” she replied, with a calmness that exasperated me,
“that it was possible to mention the time in my letter, and that there
is no need to inform a servant of it.”

“Edmee, you ought to be a little more considerate of me,” I cried.

“That doesn’t trouble me the least in the world,” she replied.

And throwing me the letter she had received across the table she went
out to give the answer to the messenger herself. I do not know whether
she had told me to read this letter; but I do know that the impulse
which urged me to do so was irresistible. It ran somewhat as follows:

“Edmee, I have at last discovered the fatal secret which, according to
you, sets an impassable barrier in the way of our union. Bernard loves
you; his agitation this morning betrayed him. But you do not love him, I
am sure . . . that would be impossible! You would have told me frankly.
The obstacle, then, must be elsewhere. Forgive me! It has come to my
knowledge that you spent two hours in the brigand’s den. Unhappy girl!
your misfortune, your prudence, your sublime delicacy make you still
nobler in my eyes. And why did you not confide to me at once the
misfortune of which you were a victim? I could have eased your sorrow
and my own by a word. I could have helped you to hide your secret. I
could have wept with you; or, rather, I could have wiped out the odious
recollection by displaying an attachment proof against anything. But
there is no need to despair; there is still time to say this word, and
I do so now: Edmee, I love you more than ever; more than ever I am
resolved to offer you my name; will you deign to accept it?”

This note was signed Adhemar de la Marche.

I had scarcely finished reading it when Edmee returned, and came towards
the fire-place with an anxious look, as if she had forgotten some
precious object. I handed her the letter that I had just read; but she
took it absently, and, stooping over the hearth with an air of relief,
eagerly seized a crumpled piece of paper which the flames had merely
scorched. This was the first answer she had written to M. de la Marche’s
note, the one she had not judged fit to send.

“Edmee,” I said, throwing myself on my knees, “let me see that letter.
Whatever if may be, I will submit to the decree dictated by your first
impulse.”

“You really would?” she asked, with an indefinable expression.
“Supposing I loved M. de la Marche, and that I was making a great
sacrifice for your sake in refusing him, would you be generous enough to
release me from my word?”

I hesitated for a moment. A cold sweat broke out all over me. I looked
her full in the face; but her eyes were inscrutable and betrayed no hint
of her thoughts. If I had fancied that she really loved me and that
she was putting my virtue to the test, I should perhaps have played the
hero; but I was afraid of some trap. My passion overmastered me. I felt
that I had not the strength to renounce my claim with a good grace; and
hypocrisy was repugnant to me. I rose to my feet, trembling with rage.

“You love him!” I cried. “Confess that you love him!”

“And if I did,” she answered, putting the letter in her pocket, “where
would be the crime?”

“The crime would be that hitherto you have lied in telling me that you
did not love him.”

“Hitherto is saying a good deal,” she rejoined, looking at me fixedly;
“we have not discussed the matter since last year. At that time it was
possible that I did not love Adhemar very much, and at present it might
be possible that I loved him more than you. If I compare the conduct of
both to-day I see on the one hand a man without proper pride and without
delicacy, presuming upon a promise which my heart perhaps has never
ratified; on the other I see an admirable friend whose sublime devotion
is ready to brave all prejudices; who--believing that I bear the smirch
of an indelible shame--is none the less prepared to cover the blot with
his protection.”

“What! this wretch believes that I have done violence to you, and yet
does not challenge me to a duel?”

“That is not what he believes, Bernard. He knows that you rescued me
from Roche-Mauprat; but he thinks that you helped me too late, and that
I was the victim of the other brigands.”

“And he wants to marry you, Edmee? Either the man’s devotion is sublime,
as you say, or he is deeper in debt than you think.”

“How dare you say that?” said Edmee angrily. “Such an odious explanation
of generous conduct can proceed only from an unfeeling soul or a
perverse mind. Be silent, unless you wish me to hate you.”

“Say that you hate me, Edmee; say so without fear; I know it.”

“Without fear! You should know likewise that I have not yet done you the
honour to fear you. However, tell me this: without inquiring into what
I intend to do, can you understand that you ought to give me my liberty,
and abandon your barbarous rights?”

“I understand nothing except that I love you madly, and that these nails
of mine shall tear out the heart of any man who tries to win you from
me. I know that I shall force you to love me, and that, if I do not
succeed, I will at any rate not let you belong to another while I am
alive. The man will have to walk over my body riddled with wounds
and bleeding from every pore, ere he can put the wedding-ring on your
finger; with my last breath, too, I will dishonour you by proclaiming
that you are my mistress, and thus cloud the joy of any man who may
triumph over me; and if I can stab you as I die, I will, so that in the
tomb, at least, you may be my wife. That is what I purpose doing, Edmee.
And now, practise all your arts on me; lead me on from trap to trap;
rule me with your admirable diplomacy. I may be duped a hundred times
because of my ignorance, but have I not sworn by the name of Mauprat?”

“Mauprat the Hamstringer!” she added with freezing irony.

And she turned to go out.

I was about to seize her arm when the bell rang; it was the abbe who had
returned. As soon as he appeared Edmee shook hands with him, and retired
to her room without saying a single word to me.

The good abbe, noticing my agitation, questioned me with that assurance
which his claims on my affections were henceforth to give him. The
present matter, however, was the only one on which we had never had an
explanation. In vain had he sought to introduce it. He had not given
me a single lesson in history without leading up to some famous love
affairs and drawing from them an example or a precept of moderation or
generosity; but he had not succeeded in making me breathe a word on this
subject. I could not bring myself to forgive him altogether for having
done me an ill turn with Edmee. I even had a suspicion that he was still
injuring my cause; and I therefore put myself on guard against all the
arguments of his philosophy and all the seductions of his friendship. On
this special evening I was more unassailable than ever. I left him ill
at ease and depressed, and went and threw myself on my bed, where I
buried my head in the clothes so as to stifle the customary sobs, those
pitiless conquerors of my pride and my rage.




XIV

The next day I was in a state of gloomy despair; Edmee was icily cold;
M. de la Marche did not come. I fancied I had seen the abbe going
to call on him, and subsequently telling Edmee the result of their
interview. However, they betrayed no signs of agitation, and I had
to endure my suspense in silence. I could not get a minute with Edmee
alone. In the morning I went on foot to M. de la Marche’s house. What I
intended saying to him I do not know; my state of exasperation was such
that it drove me to act without either object or plan. Having learnt
that he had left Paris, I returned. I found my uncle very depressed.
On seeing me he frowned, and, after forcing himself to exchange a few
meaningless words with me, left me to the abbe, who tried to draw me
on to speak, but succeeded no better than the night before. For several
days I sought an opportunity of speaking with Edmee, but she always
managed to avoid it. Preparations were being made for the return to
Sainte-Severe; she seemed neither sorry nor pleased at the prospect.
I determined to slip a note between the page of her book asking for an
interview. Within five minutes I received the following reply:

“An interview would lead to nothing. You are persisting in your boorish
behaviour; I shall persevere in what I believe to be the path of
integrity. An upright conscience cannot go from its word. I had sworn
never to be any man’s but yours. I shall not marry, for I did not swear
that I would be yours whatever might happen. If you continue to be
unworthy of my esteem I shall take steps to remain free. My poor father
is sinking into the grave; a convent shall be my refuge when the only
tie which binds me to the world is broken.”

I had fulfilled all the conditions imposed by Edmee, and now, it seemed,
her only return was an order that I should break them. I thus found
myself in the same position as on the day of her conversation with the
abbe.

I passed the remainder of the day shut up in my room. All through the
night I walked up and down in violent agitation. I made no effort to
sleep. I will not tell you the thoughts that passed through my
mind; they were not unworthy of an honest man. At daybreak I was at
Lafayette’s house. He procured me the necessary papers for leaving
France. He told me to go and await him in Spain, whence he was going to
sail for the United States. I returned to our house to get the clothes
and money indispensable to the humblest of travellers. I left a note
for my uncle, so that he might not feel uneasy at my absence; this I
promised to explain very soon in a long letter. I begged him to refrain
from passing sentence on me until it arrived, and assured him that I
should never forget all his goodness.

I left before any one in the house was up; for I was afraid that my
resolution might be shaken at the least sign of friendship, and I felt
that I could no longer impose upon a too generous affection. I could
not, however, pass Edmee’s door without pressing my lips to the lock.
Then, hiding my head in my hands, I rushed away like a madman, and
scarcely stopped until I had reached the other side of the Pyrenees.
There I took a short rest, and wrote to Edmee that, as far as concerned
myself, she was free; that I would not thwart a single wish of hers; but
that it was impossible for me to be a witness of my rival’s triumph. I
felt firmly convinced that she loved him; and I resolved to crush out
my own love. I was promising more than I could perform; but these first
manifestations of wounded pride gave me confidence in myself. I also
wrote to my uncle to tell him I should not hold myself worthy of the
boundless affection he had bestowed on me until I had won my spurs as a
knight. I confided to him my hopes of a soldier’s fame and fortune with
all the candour of conceit; and since I felt sure that Edmee would
read this letter I feigned unclouded delight and an ardour that knew no
regrets; I did not know whether my uncle was aware of the real cause of
my departure; but my pride could not bring itself to confess. It was the
same with the abbe, to whom I likewise wrote a letter full of gratitude
and affection. I ended by begging my uncle to put himself to no expense
on my account over the gloomy keep at Roche-Mauprat, assuring him that I
could never bring myself to live there. I urged him to consider the fief
as his daughter’s property, and only asked that he would be good enough
to advance me my share of the income for two or three years, so that I
might pay the expenses of my own outfit, and thus prevent my devotion to
the American cause from being a burden to the noble Lafayette.

My conduct and my letters apparently gave satisfaction. Soon after I
reached the coast of Spain I received from my uncle a letter full of
kindly exhortations, and of mild censure for my abrupt departure. He
gave me a father’s blessing, and declared on his honour that the fief
of Roche-Mauprat would never be accepted by Edmee, and sent me a
considerable sum of money exclusive of the income due me in the future.
The abbe expressed the same mild censure, together with still warmer
exhortations. It was easy to see that he preferred Edmee’s tranquility
to my happiness, and that he was full of genuine joy at my departure.
Nevertheless he had a liking for me, and his friendship showed itself
touchingly through the cruel satisfaction that was mingled with it. He
expressed envy of my lot; proclaimed his enthusiasm for the cause of
independence; and declared that he himself had more than once felt
tempted to throw off the cassock and take up the musket. All this,
however, was mere boyish affectation; his timid, gentle nature always
kept him the priest under the mask of the philosopher.

Between these two letters I found a little note without any address,
which seemed as if it had been slipped in as an after-thought. I was not
slow to see that it was from the one person in the world who was of real
interest to me. Yet I had not the courage to open it. I walked up and
down the sandy beach, turning over this little piece of paper in my
hands, fearful that by reading it I might destroy the kind of desperate
calm my resolution had given me. Above all, I dreaded lest it might
contain expressions of thanks and enthusiastic joy, behind which I
should have divined the rapture of contented love for another.

“What can she be writing to me about?” I said to myself. “Why does she
write at all? I do not want her pity, still less her gratitude.”

I felt tempted to throw this fateful little note into the sea. Once,
indeed I held it out over the waves, but I immediately pressed it to
my bosom, and kept it hidden there a few moments as if I had been a
believer in that second sight preached by the advocates of magnetism,
who assert that they can read with the organs of feeling and thought as
well as with their eyes.

At last I resolved to break the seal. The words I read were these:

“You have done well, Bernard; but I give you no thanks, as your absence
will cause me more suffering than I can tell. Still, go wherever honour
and love of truth call you; you will always be followed by my good
wishes and prayers. Return when your mission is accomplished; you will
find me neither married nor in a convent.”

In this note she had inclosed the cornelian ring she had given me during
my illness and which I had returned on leaving Paris. I had a little
gold box made to hold this ring and note, and I wore it near my heart as
a talisman. Lafayette, who had been arrested in France by order of the
Government, which was opposed to his expedition, soon came and joined us
after escaping from prison. I had had time to make my preparations, and
I sailed full of melancholy, ambition, and hope.

You will not expect me to give an account of the American war. Once
again I will separate my existence from the events of history as I
relate my own adventures. Here, however, I shall suppress even my
personal adventures; in my memory these form a special chapter in which
Edmee plays the part of a Madonna, constantly invoked but invisible. I
cannot think that you would be the least interested in listening to a
portion of my narrative from which this angelic figure, the only one
worthy of your attention, firstly by reason of her own worth, and then
from her influence on myself, was entirely absent. I will only state
that from the humble position which I gladly accepted in the beginning
in Washington’s army, I rose regularly but rapidly to the rank of
officer. My military education did not take long. Into this, as into
everything that I have undertaken during my life, I put my whole soul,
and through the pertinacity of my will I overcame all obstacles.

I won the confidence of my illustrious chiefs. My excellent constitution
fitted me well for the hardships of war; my old brigand habits too were
of immense service to me; I endured reverses with a calmness beyond the
reach of most of the young Frenchmen who had embarked with me, however
brilliant their courage might otherwise have been. My own was cool
and tenacious, to the great surprise of our allies, who more than once
doubted my origin, on seeing how quickly I made myself at home in the
forests, and how often my cunning and suspiciousness made me a match for
the savages who sometimes harassed our manoeuvres.

In the midst of my labours and frequent changes of place I was fortunate
enough to be able to cultivate my mind through my intimacy with a young
man of merit whom Providence sent me as a companion and friend. Love
of the natural sciences had decided him to join our expedition, and he
never failed to show himself a good soldier; but it was easy to see that
political sympathy had played only a secondary part in his decision.
He had no desire for promotion, no aptitude for strategic studies. His
herbarium and his zoological occupations engaged his thoughts much more
than the successes of the war and the triumph of liberty. He fought too
well, when occasion arose, to ever deserve the reproach of lukewarmness;
but up to the eve of a fight and from the morrow he seemed to have
forgotten that he was engaged in anything beyond a scientific expedition
into the wilds of the New World. His trunk was always full, not of money
and valuables, but of natural history specimens; and while we were lying
on the grass on the alert for the least noise which might reveal the
approach of the enemy, he would be absorbed in the analysis of some
plant or insect. He was an admirable young man, as pure as an angel, as
unselfish as a stoic, as patient as a savant, and withal cheerful and
affectionate. When we were in danger of being surprised, he could think
and talk of nothing but the precious pebbles and the invaluable bits
of grass that he had collected and classified; and yet were one of us
wounded, he would nurse him with a kindness and zeal that none could
surpass.

One day he noticed my gold box as I was putting it in my bosom, and he
immediately begged me to let him have it, to keep a few flies’ legs and
grasshoppers’ wings which he would have defended with the last drop of
his blood. It needed all the reverence I had for the relics of my love
to resist the demands of friendship. All he could obtain from me was
permission to hide away a very pretty little plant in my precious box.
This plant, which he declared he was the first to discover, was allowed
a home by the side of my _fiancee’s_ ring and note only on condition
that it should be called Edmunda sylvestris; to this he consented. He
had given the name of Samuel Adams to a beautiful wild apple-tree;
he had christened some industrious bee or other Franklin; and nothing
pleased him more than to associate some honoured name with his ingenious
observations.

The attachment I felt for him was all the more genuine from its being my
first friendship with a man of my own age. The pleasure which I derived
from this intimacy gave me a new insight into life, and revealed
capacities and needs of the soul of which I had hitherto been ignorant.
As I could never wholly break away from that love of chivalry which had
been implanted in me in early childhood, it pleased me to look upon him
as my “brother in arms,” and I expressed a wish that he would give me
this special title too, to the exclusion of every other intimate friend.
He caught at the idea with a gladness of heart that showed me how lively
was the sympathy between us. He declared that I was a born naturalist,
because I was so fitted for a roving life and rough expeditions.
Sometimes he would reproach me with absent-mindedness, and scold me
seriously for carelessly stepping upon interesting plants, but he would
assert that I was endowed with a sense of method, and that some day
I might invent, not a theory of nature, but an excellent system of
classification. His prophecy was never fulfilled, but his encouragement
aroused a taste for study in me, and prevented my mind from being wholly
paralyzed by camp life. To me he was as a messenger from heaven;
without him I should perhaps have become, if not the Hamstringer of
Roche-Mauprat, at all events the savage of Varenne again. His teachings
revived in me the consciousness of intellectual life. He enlarged
my ideas and also ennobled my instincts; for, though his marvellous
integrity and his modest disposition prevented him from throwing himself
into philosophical discussions, he had an innate love of justice, and he
judged all questions of sentiment and morality with unerring wisdom.
He acquired an ascendency over me which the abbe had never been able to
acquire, owing to the attitude of mutual distrust in which we had been
placed from the beginning. He revealed to me the wonders of a large part
of the physical world, but what he taught me of chiefest value was to
learn to know myself, and to ponder over my own impressions. I succeeded
in controlling my impulses up to a certain point. I could never subdue
my pride and violent temper. A man cannot change the essence of his
nature, but he can guide his divers faculties towards a right path; he
can almost succeed in turning his faults to account--and this, indeed,
is the great secret and the great problem of education.

The conversations with my friend Arthur led me into such a train of
thought that from my recollections of Edmee’s conduct I came to deduce
logically the motives which must have inspired it. I found her noble
and generous, especially in those matters which, owing to my distorted
vision and false judgment, had caused me most pain. I did not love her
the more for this--that would have been impossible--but I succeeded in
understanding why I loved her with an unconquerable love in spite of
all she had made me suffer. This sacred fire burned in my soul
without growing dim for one instant during the whole six years of our
separation. In spite of the rich vitality which pulsed through my veins;
in spite of the promptings of an external nature full of voluptuousness;
in spite of the bad examples and numerous opportunities which tempted
mortal weakness in the freedom of a roving, military life, I call God
to witness that I preserved my robe of innocence undefiled, and that I
never felt the kiss of a woman. Arthur, whose calmer organization was
less susceptible to temptation, and who, moreover, was almost entirely
engrossed in intellectual labour, did not always practise the same
austerity; nay, he frequently advised me not to run the risk of an
exceptional life, contrary to the demands of Nature. When I confided to
him that a master-passion removed all weaknesses from my path and made
a fall impossible, he ceased to reason against what he called
my fanaticism (this was a word very much in vogue and applied
indiscriminately to almost everything). I observed, indeed, that he had
a more profound esteem for me, I may even say a sort of respect which
did not express itself in words, but which was revealed by a thousand
little signs of compliance and deference.

One day, when he was speaking of the great power exercised by gentleness
of manners in alliance with a resolute will, citing both good and bad
examples from the history of men, especially the gentleness of the
apostles and the hypocrisy of the priests of all religions, it came into
my mind to ask him if, with my headstrong nature and hasty temper, I
should ever be able to exercise any influence on my fellows. When I used
this last word I was, of course, thinking only of Edmee. Arthur replied
that the influence which I exercised would be other than that of studied
gentleness.

“Your influence,” he said, “will be due to your natural goodness of
heart. Warmth of soul, ardour and perseverance in affection, these are
what are needed in family life, and these qualities make our defects
loved even by those who have to suffer from them most. We should
endeavour, therefore, to master ourselves out of love for those who
love us; but to propose to one’s self a system of moderation in the
most intimate concerns of love and friendship would, in my opinion, be
a childish task, a work of egotism which would kill all affection, in
ourselves first, and soon afterwards in the others. I was speaking of
studied moderation only in the exercise of authority over the masses.
Now, should your ambition ever . . .”

“You believe, then,” I said, without listening to the last part of his
speech, “that, such as I am, I might make a woman happy and force her to
love me, in spite of all my faults and the harm they cause?”

“O lovelorn brain!” he exclaimed. “How difficult it is to distract your
thoughts! . . . Well, if you wish to know, Bernard, I will tell you what
I think of your love-affair. The person you love so ardently loves you,
unless she is incapable of love or quite bereft of judgment.”

I assured him that she was as much above all other women as the lion
is above the squirrel, the cedar above the hyssop, and with the help of
metaphors I succeeded in convincing him. Then he persuaded me to tell
him a few details, in order, as he said, that he might judge of my
position with regard to Edmee. I opened my heart without reserve, and
told him my history from beginning to end. At this time we were on the
outskirts of a beautiful forest in the last rays of the setting sun. The
park at Sainte-Severe, with its fine lordly oaks which had never known
the insult of an axe, came into my thoughts as I gazed on these trees of
the wilds, exempt from all human care, towering out above our heads in
their might and primitive grace. The glowing horizon reminded me of the
evening visits to Patience’s hut, and Edmee sitting under the golden
vine-leaves, and the notes of the merry parrots brought back to me the
warbling of the beautiful exotic birds she used to keep in her room.
I wept as I thought of the land of my birth so far away, of the broad
ocean between us which had swallowed so many pilgrims in the hour of
their return to their native shores. I also thought of the prospects of
fortune, of the dangers of war, and for the first time I felt the fear
of death; for Arthur, pressing my hand in his, assured me that I was
loved, and that in each act of harshness or distrust he found but a new
proof of affection.

“My boy,” he said, “cannot you see that if she did not want to marry
you, she would have found a hundred ways of ridding herself of your
pretensions forever? And if she had not felt an inexhaustible affection
for you, would she have taken so much trouble, and imposed so many
sacrifices upon herself to raise you from the abject condition in which
she found you, and make you worthy of her? Well, you are always dreaming
of the mighty deeds of the knight-errants of old: cannot you see that
you are a noble knight condemned by your lady to rude trials for having
failed in the laws of gallantry, for having demanded in an imperious
tone the love which ought to be sued for on bended knee?”

He then entered into a detailed examination of my misdeeds, and found
that the chastisement was severe but just. Afterwards he discussed the
probabilities of the future, and very sensibly advised me to submit
until she thought right to pardon me.

“But,” I said, “is there no shame in a man ripened, as I am now, by
reflection, and roughly tried by war, submitting like a child to the
caprices of a woman?”

“No,” replied Arthur, “there is no shame in that; and the conduct of
this woman is not dictated by caprice. One can win nothing but honour in
repairing any evil one has done; and how few men are capable of it!
It is only just that offended modesty should claim its rights and its
natural independence. You have behaved like Albion; do not be astonished
that Edmee behaves like Philadelphia. She will not yield, except on
condition of a glorious peace, and she is right.”

He wished to know how she had treated me during the two years we had
been in America. I showed him the few short letters I had received from
her. He was struck by the good sense and perfect integrity which seemed
manifested in their lofty tone and manly precision. In them Edmee had
made me no promise, nor had she even encouraged me by holding out any
direct hopes; but she had displayed a lively desire for my return, and
had spoken of the happiness we should all enjoy when, as we sat around
the fire, I should while away the evenings at the chateau with accounts
of my wonderful adventures; and she had not hesitated to tell me that,
together with her father, I was the one object of her solicitude
in life. Yet, in spite of this never-failing tenderness, a terrible
suspicion harassed me. In these short letters from my cousin, as in
those from her father and in the long, florid and affectionate epistles
from the Abbe Aubert, they never gave me any news of the events which
might be, and ought to be, taking place in the family. Each spoke of
his or her own self and never mentioned the others; or at most they
only spoke of the chevalier’s attacks of the gout. It was as though an
agreement had been made between the three that none should talk about
the occupations and state of mind of the other two.

“Shed light and ease my mind on this matter if you can,” I said to
Arthur. “There are moments when I fancy that Edmee must be married, and
that they have agreed not to inform me until I return, and what is to
prevent this, in fact? Is it probable that she likes me enough to live
a life of solitude out of love for me, when this very love, in obedience
to the dictation of a cold reason and an austere conscience, can resign
itself to seeing my absence indefinitely prolonged with the war? I have
duties to perform here, no doubt; honour demands that I should defend my
flag until the day of the triumph or the irreparable defeat of the cause
I serve; but I feel that Edmee is dearer to me than these empty honours,
and that to see her but one hour sooner I would leave my name to the
ridicule or the curses of the world.”

“This last thought,” replied Arthur, with a smile, “is suggested to you
by the violence of your passion; but you would not act as you say, even
if the opportunity occurred. When we are grappling with a single one of
our faculties we fancy the others annihilated; but let some extraneous
shock arouse them, and we realize that our soul draws its life from
several sources at the same time. You are not insensible to fame,
Bernard; and if Edmee invited you to abandon it you would perceive
that it was dearer to you than you thought. You have ardent republican
convictions, and Edmee herself was the first to inspire you with them.
What, then, would you think of her, and, indeed, what sort of woman
would she be, if she said to you to-day, ‘There is something more
important than the religion I preached to you and the gods I revealed;
something more august and more sacred, and that is my own good
pleasure’? Bernard, your love is full of contradictory desires.
Inconsistency, moreover, is the mark of all human loves. Men imagine
that a woman can have no separate existence of her own, and that she
must always be wrapped up in them; and yet the only woman they love
deeply is she whose character seems to raise her above the weakness
and indolence of her sex. You see how all the settlers in this country
dispose of the beauty of their slaves, but they have no love for them,
however beautiful they may be; and if by chance they become genuinely
attached to one of them, their first care is to set her free. Until then
they do not think that they are dealing with a human being. A spirit
of independence, the conception of virtue, a love of duty, all these
privileges of lofty souls are essential, therefore, in the woman who
is to be one’s companion through life; and the more your mistress gives
proof of strength and patience, the more you cherish her, in spite of
what you may have to suffer. You must learn, then, to distinguish love
from desire; desire wishes to break through the very impediments by
which it is attracted, and it dies amid the ruins of the virtue it has
vanquished; love wishes to live, and in order to do that, it would fain
see the object of its worship long defended by that wall of adamant
whose strength and splendour mean true worth and true beauty.”

In this way would Arthur explain to me the mysterious springs of my
passion, and throw the light of his wisdom upon the stormy abyss of my
soul. Sometimes he used to add:

“If Heaven had granted me the woman I have now and then dreamed of, I
think I should have succeeded in making a noble and generous passion of
my love; but science has asked for too much of my time. I have not had
leisure to look for my ideal; and if perchance it has crossed my path,
I have not been able either to study it or recognise it. You have been
fortunate, Bernard, but then, you do not sound the deeps of natural
history; one man cannot have everything.”

As to my suspicions about Edmee’s marriage, he rejected them with
contempt as morbid fancies. To him, indeed, Edmee’s silence showed an
admirable delicacy of feeling and conduct.

“A vain person,” he said, “would take care to let you know all the
sacrifices she had made on your account, and would enumerate the titles
and qualities of the suitors she had refused. Edmee, however, has too
noble a soul, too serious a mind, to enter into these futile details.
She looks upon your covenant as inviolable, and does not imitate those
weak consciences which are always talking of their victories, and making
a merit of doing that in which true strength finds no difficulty. She is
so faithful by nature that she never imagines that any one can suspect
her of being otherwise.”

These talks poured healing balm on my wounds. When at last France openly
declared herself an ally of America, I received a piece of news from the
abbe that entirely set my mind at ease on one point. He wrote to me that
I should probably meet an old friend again in the New World; the Count
de la Marche had been given command of a regiment, and was setting out
for the United States.

“And between ourselves,” added the abbe, “it is quite time that he made
a position for himself. This young man, though modest and steady, has
always been weak enough to yield to the prejudices of noble birth. He
has been ashamed of his poverty, and has tried to hide it as one hides
a leprosy. The result is that his efforts to prevent others from seeing
the progress of his ruin, have now ruined him completely. Society
attributes the rupture between Edmee and him to these reverses of
fortune; and people even go so far as to say that he was but little
in love with her person, and very much with her dowry. I cannot bring
myself to credit him with contemptible views; and I can only think that
he is suffering those mortifications which arise from a false estimate
of the value of the good things of this world. If you happen to meet
him, Edmee wishes you to show him some friendship, and to let him
know how great an interest she has always taken in him. Your excellent
cousin’s conduct in this matter, as in all others, has been full of
kindness and dignity.”




XV

One the eve of M. de la Marche’s departure, and after the abbe’s letter
had been sent, a little incident had happened in Varenne which, when I
heard of it in America, caused me considerable surprise and pleasure.
Moreover, it is linked in a remarkable manner with the most important
events of my life, as you will see later.

Although rather seriously wounded in the unfortunate affair of Savannah,
I was actively engaged in Virginia, under General Greene, in collecting
the remains of the army commanded by Gates, whom I considered a much
greater hero than his more fortunate rival, Washington. We had just
learnt of the landing of M. de Ternay’s squadron, and the depression
which had fallen on us at this period of reverses and distress was
beginning to vanish before the prospect of re-enforcements. These, as
a fact, were less considerable than we had expected. I was strolling
through the woods with Arthur, a short distance from the camp, and we
were taking advantage of this short respite to have a talk about other
matters than Cornwallis and the infamous Arnold. Long saddened by
the sight of the woes of the American nation, by the fear of seeing
injustice and cupidity triumphing over the cause of the people, we were
seeking relief in a measure of gaiety. When I had an hour’s leisure I
used to escape from my stern toils to the oasis of my own thoughts in
the family at Sainte-Severe. At such a time I was wont to tell my kind
friend Arthur some of the comic incidents of my entry into life after
leaving Roche-Mauprat. At one time I would give him a description of
the costume in which I first appeared; at another I would describe
Mademoiselle Leblanc’s contempt and loathing for my person, and her
recommendation to her friend Saint-Jean never to approach within arms’
length of me. As I thought of these amusing individuals, the face of
the solemn hidalgo, Marcasse, somehow arose in my memory, and I began
to give a faithful and detailed picture of the dress, and bearing, and
conversation of this enigmatic personage. Not that Marcasse was actually
as comic as he appeared to be in my imagination; but at twenty a man is
only a boy, especially when he is a soldier and has just escaped great
dangers, and so is filled with careless pride at the conquest of his own
life. Arthur would laugh right heartily as he listened to me, declaring
that he would give his whole collection of specimens for such a curious
animal as I had just described. The pleasure he derived from my childish
chatter increased my vivacity, and I do not know whether I should
have been able to resist the temptation to exaggerate my uncle’s
peculiarities, when suddenly at a turn in our path we found ourselves
in the presence of a tall man, poorly dressed, and terribly haggard, who
was walking towards us with a serious pensive expression, and carrying
in his hand a long naked sword, the point of which was peacefully
lowered to the ground. This individual bore such a strong resemblance
to the one I had just described to Arthur, struck by the parallel,
burst into uncontrollable laughter, and moving aside to make way for
Marcasse’s double, threw himself upon the grass in a convulsive fit of
coughing.

For myself, I was far from laughing; for nothing that has a supernatural
air about it fails to produce a vivid impression even on the man most
accustomed to dangers. With staring eyes and outstretched arms we drew
near to each other, myself and he, not the shade of Marcasse, but
the venerable person himself, in flesh and blood, of the hidalgo
mole-catcher.

Petrified with astonishment when I saw what I had taken for his ghost
slowly carry his hand to the corner of his hat and raise it without
bending the fraction of an inch, I started back a yard or two; and this
movement, which Arthur thought was a joke on my part, only increased his
merriment. The weasel-hunter was by no means disconcerted; perhaps in
his judicial gravity he was thinking that this was the usual way to
greet people on the other side of the ocean.

But Arthur’s laughter almost proved infectious when Marcasse said to me
with incomparable gravity:

“Monsieur Bernard, I have had the honour of searching for you for a long
time.”

“For a long time, in truth, my good Marcasse,” I replied, as I shook my
old friend’s hand with delight. “But, tell me by what strange power I
have been lucky enough to draw you hither. In the old days you passed
for a sorcerer; is it possible that I have become one too without
knowing it?”

“I will explain all that, my dear general,” answered Marcasse, who was
apparently dazzled by my captain’s uniform. “If you will allow me to
accompany you I will tell you many things--many things!”

On hearing Marcasse repeat his words in a low voice, as if furnishing an
echo for himself, a habit which only a minute before I was in the act of
imitating, Arthur burst out laughing again. Marcasse turned toward
him and after surveying him intently bowed with imperturbable gravity.
Arthur, suddenly recovering his serious mood, rose and, with comic
dignity, bowed in return almost to the ground.

We returned to the camp together. On the way Marcasse told me his story
in that brief style of his, which, as it forced his hearer to ask a
thousand wearisome questions, far from simplifying his narrative, made
it extraordinarily complicated. It afforded Arthur great amusement; but
as you would not derive the same pleasure from listening to an exact
reproduction of this interminable dialogue, I will limit myself to
telling you how Marcasse had come to leave his country and his friends,
in order to give the American cause the help of his sword.

M. de la Marche happened to be setting out for America at the very time
when Marcasse came to his castle in Berry for a week, to make his
annual round among the beams and joists in the barns. The inmates of
the chateau, in their excitement at the count’s departure, indulged
in wonderful commentaries on that far country, so full of dangers and
marvels, from which, according to the village wiseacres, no man ever
returned without a vast fortune, and so many gold and silver ingots that
he needed ten ships to carry them all. Now, under his icy exterior,
Don Marcasse, like some hyperborean volcano, concealed a glowing
imagination, a passionate love of the marvellous. Accustomed to live in
a state of equilibrium on narrow beams in evidently loftier regions than
other men, and not insensible to the glory of astounding the bystanders
every day by the calm daring of his acrobatic movements, he let himself
be fired by these pictures of Eldorado; and his dreams were the more
extravagant because, as usual, he unbosomed himself to no one. M. de
la Marche, therefore, was very much surprised when, on the eve of his
departure, Marcasse presented himself, and proposed to accompany him to
America as his valet. In vain did M. de la Marche remind him that he was
very old to abandon his calling and run the risks of a new kind of life.
Marcasse displayed so much firmness that in the end he gained his point.
Various reasons led M. de la Marche to consent to the strange request.
He had resolved to take with him a servant older still than the
weasel-hunter, a man who was accompanying him only with great
reluctance. But this man enjoyed his entire confidence, a favour which
M. de la Marche was very slow to grant, since he was only able to
keep up the outward show of a man of quality, and wished to be served
faithfully, and with economy and prudence. He knew, however, that
Marcasse was scrupulously honest, and even singularly unselfish; for
there was something of Don Quixote in the man’s soul as well as in his
appearance. He had found in some ruins a sort of treasure-trove, that is
to say, an earthenware jar containing a sum of about ten thousand francs
in old gold and silver coins; and not only had he handed it over to the
owner of the ruins, whom he might easily have deceived, but further
he had refused to accept any reward, declaring emphatically in his
abbreviated jargon, “honesty would die selling itself.”

Marcasse’s economy, his discretion, his punctuality, seemed likely to
make him a valuable man, if he could be trained to put these qualities
at the service of others. The one thing to be feared was that he might
not be able to accustom himself to his loss of independence. However,
M. de la Marche thought that, before M. de Ternay’s squadron sailed, he
would have time to test his new squire sufficiently.

On his side, Marcasse felt many regrets at taking leave of his friends
and home; for if he had “friends everywhere and everywhere a native
place,” as he said, in allusion to his wandering life, he still had a
very marked preference for Varenne; and of all his castles (for he was
accustomed to call every place he stopped at “his”), the chateau of
Sainte-Severe was the only one which he arrived at with pleasure and
left with regret. One day, when he had missed his footing on the roof
and had rather a serious fall, Edmee, then still a child, had won his
heart by the tears she had shed over this accident, and the artless
attentions she had shown him. And ever since Patience had come to dwell
on the edge of the park, Marcasse had felt still more attracted toward
Sainte-Severe; for in Patience Marcasse had found his Orestes. Marcasse
did not always understand Patience; but Patience was the only man who
thoroughly understood Marcasse, and who knew how much chivalrous honesty
and noble courage lay hidden beneath that odd exterior. Humbly bowing
to the hermit’s intellectual superiority, the weasel-hunter would stop
respectfully whenever the poetic frenzy took possession of Patience and
made his words unintelligible. At such a time Marcasse would refrain
from questions and ill-timed remarks with touching gentleness; would
lower his eyes, and nodding his head from time to time as if he
understood and approved, would, at least, afford his friend the innocent
pleasure of being listened to without contradiction.

Marcasse, however, had understood enough to make him embrace republican
ideas and share in those romantic hopes of universal levelling and a
return to the golden age, which had been so ardently fostered by old
Patience. Having frequently heard his friend say that these doctrines
were to be cultivated with prudence (a precept, however, to which
Patience gave but little heed himself), the hidalgo, inclined to
reticence both by habit and inclination, never spoke of his philosophy;
but he proved himself a more efficacious propagandist by carrying about
from castle to cottage, and from house to farm, those little cheap
editions of _La Science du Bonhomme Richard_, and other small treatises
on popular patriotism, which, according to the Jesuits, a secret society
of Voltairian philosophers, devoted to the diabolical practice of
freemasonry, circulated gratis among the lower classes.

Thus in Marcasse’s sudden resolution there was as much revolutionary
enthusiasm as love of adventure. For a long time the dormouse and
polecat had seemed to him overfeeble enemies for his restless valour,
even as the granary floor seemed to afford too narrow a field. Every
day he read the papers of the previous day in the servants’ hall of
the houses he visited; and it appeared to him that this war in America,
which was hailed as the awakening of the spirit of justice and liberty
in the New World, ought to produce a revolution in France. It is true
he had a very literal notion of the way in which ideas were to cross the
seas and take possession of the minds of our continent. In his dreams he
used to see an army of victorious Americans disembarking from numberless
ships, and bringing the olive branch of peace and the horn of plenty to
the French nation. In these same dreams he beheld himself at the head
of a legion of heroes returning to Varenne as a warrior, a legislator, a
rival of Washington, suppressing abuses, cutting down enormous fortunes,
assigning to each proletarian a suitable share, and, in the midst of his
far-reaching and vigorous measures, protecting the good and fair-dealing
nobles, and assuring an honourable existence to them. Needless to say,
the distress inseparable from all great political crises never entered
into Marcasse’s mind, and not a single drop of blood sullied the
romantic picture which Patience had unrolled before his eyes.

From these sublime hopes to the role of valet to M. de la Marche was a
far cry; but Marcasse could reach his goal by no other way. The ranks
of the army corps destined for America had long been filled, and it was
only in the character of a passenger attached to the expedition that
he could take his place on one of the merchant ships that followed the
expedition. He had questioned the abbe on these points without revealing
his plans. His departure quite staggered all the inhabitants of Varenne.

No sooner had he set foot on the shores of the States than he felt an
irresistible inclination to take his big hat and his big sword and go
off all alone through the woods, as he had been accustomed to do in his
own country. His conscience, however, prevented him from quitting his
master after having pledged himself to serve him. He had calculated that
fortune would help him, and fortune did. The war proved much more bloody
and vigorous than had been expected, and M. de la Marche feared, though
wrongly, that he might be impeded by the poor health of his gaunt
squire. Having a suspicion, too, of the man’s desire for liberty, he
offered him a sum of money and some letters of recommendation, to enable
him to join the American troops as a volunteer. Marcasse, knowing the
state of his master’s fortune, refused the money, and only accepted the
letters; and then set off with as light a step as the nimblest weasels
that he had ever killed.

His intention was to make for Philadelphia; but, through a chance
occurrence which I need not relate, he learnt that I was in the South,
and, rightly calculating that he would obtain both advice and help from
me, he had set out to find me, alone, on foot, through unknown countries
almost uninhabited and often full of danger of all kinds. His clothes
alone had suffered; his yellow face had not changed its tint, and he was
no more surprised at his latest exploit than if he had merely covered
the distance from Sainte-Severe to Gazeau Tower.

The only fresh habit that I noticed in him, was that he would turn round
from time to time, and look behind him, as if he had felt inclined to
call some one; then immediately after he would smile and sigh almost at
the same instant. I could not resist a desire to ask him the cause of
his uneasiness.

“Alas!” he replied, “habit can’t get rid of; a poor dog! good dog!
Always saying, ‘Here Blaireau! Blaireau, here!’”

“I understand,” I said, “Blaireau is dead, and you cannot accustom
yourself to the idea that you will never see him at your heels again.”

“Dead!” he exclaimed, with an expression of horror. “No, thank God!
Friend Patience, great friend! Blaireau quite well off, but sad like his
master; his master alone!”

“If Blaireau is with Patience,” said Arthur, “he is well off, as you
say; for Patience wants nothing. Patience will love him because he loves
his master, and you are certain to see your good friend and faithful dog
again.”

Marcasse turned his eyes upon the individual who seemed to be so well
acquainted with his life; but, feeling sure that he had never seen him
before, he acted as he was wont to do when he did not understand; he
raised his hat and bowed respectfully.

On my immediate recommendation Marcasse was enrolled in my company
and, a little while afterward, was made a sergeant. The worthy man went
through the whole campaign with me, and went through it bravely; and in
1782, when I rejoined Rochambeau’s army to fight under the French flag,
he followed me, as he was anxious to share my lot until the end. In the
early days I looked upon him rather as an amusement than a companion;
but his excellent conduct and calm fearlessness soon won for him the
esteem of all, and I had reason to be proud of my _protege_. Arthur also
conceived a great friendship for him; and, when off duty, he accompanied
us in all our walks, carrying the naturalist’s box and running the
snakes through with his sword.

But when I tried to make him speak of my cousin, he by no means
satisfied me. Whether he did not understand how eager I felt to learn
all the details of the life she was leading far away from me, or
whether in this matter he was obeying one of those inviolable laws
which governed his conscience, I could never obtain from him any clear
solution of the doubts which harassed me. Quite early he told me that
there was no question of her marriage with any one; but, accustomed
though I was to his vague manner of expressing himself, I imagined he
seemed embarrassed in making this assertion and had the air of a man
who had sworn to keep a secret. Honour forbade me to insist to such an
extent as to let him see my hopes, and so there always remained between
us a painful point which I tried to avoid touching upon, but to which,
in spite of myself, I was continually returning. As long as Arthur was
near me, I retained my reason, and interpreted Edmee’s letters in the
most loyal way; but when I was unfortunate enough to be separated from
him, my sufferings revived, and my stay in America became more irksome
to me every day.

Our separation took place when I left the American army to fight
under the command of the French general. Arthur was an American; and,
moreover, he was only waiting for the end of the war to retire from the
service, and settle in Boston with Dr. Cooper, who loved him as his son,
and who had undertaken to get him appointed principal librarian to the
library of the Philadelphia Society. This was all the reward Arthur
desired for his labours.

The events which filled my last years in America belong to history.
It was with a truly personal delight that I hailed the peace which
proclaimed the United States a free nation. I had begun to chafe at my
long absence from France; my passion had been growing ever greater, and
left no room for the intoxication of military glory. Before my departure
I went to take leave of Arthur. Then I sailed with the worthy Marcasse,
divided between sorrow at parting from my only friend, and joy at the
prospect of once more seeing my only love. The squadron to which my ship
belonged experienced many vicissitudes during the passage, and several
times I gave up all hope of ever kneeling before Edmee under the great
oaks of Sainte-Severe. At last, after a final storm off the coast of
France, I set foot on the shores of Brittany, and fell into the arms
of my poor sergeant, who had borne our common misfortunes, if not with
greater physical courage, at least with a calmer spirit, and we mingled
our tears.




XVI

We set out from Brest without sending any letter to announce our coming.

When we arrived near Varenne we alighted from the post-chaise and,
ordering the driver to proceed by the longest road to Saint-Severe, took
a short cut through the woods. As soon as I saw the trees in the park
raising their venerable heads above the copses like a solemn phalanx of
druids in the middle of a prostrate multitude, my heart began to beat so
violently that I was forced to stop.

“Well,” said Marcasse, turning round with an almost stern expression, as
if he would have reproached me for my weakness.

But a moment later I saw that his own face, too, was betraying
unexpected emotion. A plaintive whining and a bushy tail brushing
against his legs had made him start. He uttered a loud cry on seeing
Blaireau. The poor animal had scented his master from afar, and had
rushed forward with all the speed of his first youth to roll at his
feet. For a moment we thought he was going to die there, for he remained
motionless and convulsed, as it were, under Marcasse’s caressing hand;
then suddenly he sprang up, as if struck with an idea worthy of a man,
and set off with the speed of lightning in the direction of Patience’s
hut.

“Yes, go and tell my friend, good dog!” exclaimed Marcasse; “a better
friend than you would be more than man.”

He turned towards me, and I saw two big tears trickling down the cheeks
of the impassive hidalgo.

We hastened our steps till we reached the hut. It had undergone striking
improvements; a pretty rustic garden, inclosed by a quickset hedge with
a bank of stones behind, extended round the little house. The approach
to this was no longer a rough little path, but a handsome walk, on
either side of which splendid vegetables stretched out in regular rows,
like an army in marching order. The van was composed of a battalion of
cabbages; carrots and lettuces formed the main body; and along the hedge
some modest sorrel brought up the rear. Beautiful apple-trees, already
well grown, spread their verdant shade above these plants; while
pear-trees, alternately standards and espaliers, with borders of thyme
and sage kissing the feet of sunflowers and gilliflowers, convicted
Patience of a strange return to ideas of social order, and even to a
taste for luxuries.

The change was so remarkable that I thought I should no longer find
Patience in the cottage. A strange feeling of uneasiness began to come
over me; my fear almost turned into certainty when I saw two young men
from the village occupied in trimming the espaliers. Our passage had
lasted more than four months, and it must have been quite six months
since we had had any news of the hermit. Marcasse, however, seemed to
feel no fear; Blaireau had told him plainly that Patience was alive,
and the footmarks of the little dog, freshly printed in the sand of the
walk, showed the direction in which he had gone. Notwithstanding, I was
so afraid of seeing a cloud come over the joy of this day, that I did
not dare to question the gardeners about Patience. Silently I followed
the hidalgo, whose eyes grew full of tears as they gazed upon this
new Eden, and whose prudent mouth let no sound escape save the word
“change,” which he repeated several times.

At last I grew impatient; the walk seemed interminable, though very
short in reality, and I began to run, my heart beating wildly.

“Perhaps Edmee,” I said to myself, “is here!”

However, she was not there, and I could only hear the voice of the
hermit saying:

“Now, then! What is the matter? Has the poor dog gone mad? Down,
Blaireau! You would never have worried your master in this way. This is
what comes of being too kind!”

“Blaireau is not mad!” I exclaimed, as I entered. “Have you grown deaf
to the approach of a friend, Master Patience?”

Patience, who was in the act of counting a pile of money, let it fall
on the table and came towards me with the old cordiality. I embraced him
heartily; he was surprised and touched at my joy. Then he examined
me from head to foot, and seemed to be wondering at the change in my
appearance, when Marcasse arrived at the door.

Then a sublime expression came over Patience’s face, and lifting his
strong arms to heaven, he exclaimed:

“The words of the canticle! Now let me depart in peace; for mine eyes
have seen him I yearned for.”

The hidalgo said nothing; he raised his hat as usual; then sitting down
he turned pale and shut his eyes. His dog jumped up on his knees and
displayed his affection by attempts at little cries which changed into
a series of sneezes (you remember that he was born dumb). Trembling with
old age and delight, he stretched out his pointed nose towards the long
nose of his master; but his master did not respond with the customary
“Down, Blaireau!”

Marcasse had fainted.

This loving soul, no more able than Blaireau to express itself in words,
had sunk beneath the weight of his own happiness. Patience ran
and fetched him a large mug of wine of the district, in its second
year--that is to say, the oldest and best possible. He made him swallow
a few drops; its strength revived him. The hidalgo excused his weakness
on the score of fatigue and the heat. He would not or could not assign
it to its real sense. There are souls who die out, after burning with
unsurpassable moral beauty and grandeur, without ever having found a
way, and even without ever having felt the need, of revealing themselves
to others.

When Patience, who was as demonstrative as his friend was the contrary,
had recovered from his first transports, he turned to me and said:

“Now, my young officer, I see that you have no wish to remain here long.
Let us make haste, then, to the place you are burning to reach. There is
some one who will be much surprised and much delighted, you may take my
word.”

We entered the park, and while crossing it, Patience explained the
change which had come over his habitation and his life.

“For myself,” he said to me, “you see that I have not changed. The same
appearance, the same ways; and if I offered you some wine just now, that
does not prevent me from drinking water myself. But I have money, and
land, and workmen--yes, I have. Well, all this is in spite of myself,
as you will see. Some three years ago Mademoiselle Edmee spoke of the
difficulty she had in bestowing alms so as to do real good. The abbe was
as unskilful as herself. People would impose on them every day and use
their money for bad ends; whereas proud and hard-working day-labourers
might be in a state of real distress without any one being able to
discover the fact. She was afraid that if she inquired into their wants
they might take it as an insult; and when worthless fellows appealed to
her she preferred being their dupe to erring against charity. In this
manner she used to give away a great deal of money and do very little
good. I then made her understand how money was the thing that was the
least necessary to the necessitous. I explained that men were really
unfortunate, not when they were unable to dress better than their
fellows, or go to the tavern on Sundays, or display at high-mass a
spotlessly white stocking with a red garter above the knee, or talk
about ‘My mare, my cow, my vine, my barn, etc.,’ but rather when they
were afflicted with poor health and a bad season, when they could not
protect themselves against the cold, and heat and sickness, against
the pangs of hunger and thirst. I told her, then, not to judge of the
strength and health of peasants by myself, but to go in person and
inquire into their illnesses and their wants.

“These folk are not philosophers,” I said; “they have their little
vanities, they are fond of finery, spend the little they earn on cutting
a figure, and have not foresight enough to deprive themselves of a
passing pleasure in order to lay by something against a day of real
need. In short, they do not know how to use their money; they tell you
they are in debt, and, though that may be true, it is not true that
they will use the money you give them to pay what they owe. They take no
thought of the morrow; they will agree to as high a rate of interest as
may be asked, and with your money they will buy a hemp-field or a set
of furniture so as to astonish their neighbours and make them jealous.
Meanwhile their debts go on increasing year by year, and in the end they
have to sell their hemp-field and their furniture, because the creditor,
who is always one of themselves, calls for repayment or for more
interest than they can furnish. Everything goes; the principal takes all
their capital, just as the interest has taken all their income. Then you
grow old and can work no longer; your children abandon you, because you
have brought them up badly, and because they have the same passions and
the same vanities as yourself. All you can do is to take a wallet and go
from door to door to beg your bread, because you are used to bread and
would die if you had to live on roots like the sorcerer Patience, that
outcast of Nature, whom everybody hates and despises because he has not
become a beggar.

“The beggar, moreover, is hardly worse off than the day-labourer;
probably he is better off. He is no longer troubled with pride, whether
estimable or foolish; he has no longer to suffer. The folks in his part
of the country are good to him; there is not a beggar that wants for a
bed or supper as he goes his round. The peasants load him with bits of
bread, to such an extent that he has enough to feed both poultry and
pigs in the little hovel where he has left a child and an old mother to
look after his animals. Every week he returns there and spends two or
three days, doing nothing except counting the pennies that have been
given him. These poor coins often serve to satisfy the superfluous wants
which idleness breeds. A peasant rarely takes snuff; many beggars cannot
do without it; they ask for it more eagerly than for bread. So the
beggar is no more to be pitied than the labourer; but he is corrupt and
debauched, when he is not a scoundrel and a brute, which, in truth, is
seldom enough.

“‘This, then, is what ought to be done,’ I said to Edmee; ‘and the abbe
tells me that this is also the idea of your philosophers. You who are
always ready to help the unfortunate, should give without consulting
the special fancies of the man who asks, but only after ascertaining his
real wants.’

“Edmee objected that it would be impossible for her to obtain the
necessary information; that she would have to give her whole time to
it, and neglect the chevalier, who is growing old and can no longer read
anything without his daughter’s eyes and head. The abbe was too fond
of improving his mind from the writings of the wise to have time for
anything else.

“‘That is what comes of all this study of virtue!’ I said to her; ‘it
makes a man forget to be virtuous.’

“‘You are quite right,’ answered Edmee; ‘but what is to be done?’

“I promised to think it over; and this is how I went to work. Instead of
taking my walks as usual in the direction of the woods, I paid a visit
every day to the small holdings. It cost me a great effort; I like to be
alone; and everywhere I had shunned my fellow-men for so many years that
I had lost touch with them. However, this was a duty and I did it. I
went to various houses, and by way of conversation, first of all over
hedges, and then inside the houses themselves, I made inquiries as to
those points which I wanted to learn. At first they gave me a welcome
such as they would give to a lost dog in time of drought; and with a
vexation I could scarce conceal I noticed the hatred and distrust on all
their faces. Though I had not cared to live among other men, I still
had an affection for them; I knew that they were unfortunate rather than
vicious; I had spent all my time in lamenting their woes and railing
against those that caused them; and when for the first time I saw a
possibility of doing something for some of them, these very men shut
their doors the very moment they caught sight of me in the distance, and
their children (those pretty children that I love so much!) would hide
themselves in ditches so as to escape the fever which, it was said, I
could give with a glance. However, as Edmee’s friendship for me was
well known, they did not dare to repulse me openly, and I succeeded in
getting the information we wanted. Whenever I told her of any distress
she at once supplied a remedy. One house was full of cracks; and while
the daughter was wearing an apron of cotton-cloth at four francs an ell,
the rain was falling on the grandmother’s bed and the little children’s
cradles. The roof and walls were repaired; we supplied the materials and
paid the workmen; but no more money for gaudy aprons. In another case,
an old woman had been reduced to beggary because she had listened too
well to her heart, and given all she had to her children, who had turned
her out of doors, or made her life so unbearable that she preferred to
be a tramp. We took up the old woman’s cause, and threatened that we
would bring the matter before the courts at our own expense. Thus
we obtained for her a pension, to which we added when it was not
sufficient. We induced several old persons who were in a similar
position to combine and live together under the same roof. We chose one
as head, and gave him a little capital, and as he was an industrious and
methodical man, he turned it to such profit that his children came
and made their peace with him, and asked to be allowed to help in his
establishment.

“We did many other things besides; I need not give you details, as you
will see them yourself. I say ‘we,’ because, though I did not wish to
be concerned in anything beyond what I had already done, I was gradually
drawn on and obliged to do more and more, to concern myself with many
things, and finally with everything. In short, it is I who make the
investigations, superintend the works, and conduct all negotiations.
Mademoiselle Edmee wished me to keep a sum of money by me, so that I
might dispose of it without consulting her first. This I have never
allowed myself to do; and, moreover, she has never once opposed any of
my ideas. But all this, you know, has meant much work and many worries.
Ever since the people realized that I was a little Turgot they have
grovelled before me, and that has pained me not a little. And so I have
various friends that I don’t care for, and various enemies that I could
well do without. The sham poor owe me a grudge because I do not let
myself be duped by them; and there are perverse and worthless people
who think one is always doing too much for others, and never enough for
them. With all this bustle and all these bickerings, I can no longer
take my walk during the night, and my sleep during the day. I am now
Monsieur Patience, and no longer the sorcerer of Gazeau Tower; but alas!
I am a hermit no more; and, believe me, I would wish with all my heart
that I could have been born selfish, so that I might throw off my
harness, and return to my savage life and my liberty.”

When Patience had given us this account of his work we complimented
him on it; but we ventured to express a doubt about his pretended
self-sacrifice; this magnificent garden seemed to indicate a compromise
with “those superfluous necessities,” the use of which by others he had
always deplored.

“That?” he said, waving his arm in the direction of his inclosure. “That
does not concern me; they made it against my wishes; but, as they were
worthy folk and my refusal would have grieved them, I was obliged to
allow it. You must know that, if I have stirred ingratitude in many
hearts, I have also made a few happy ones grateful. So, two or three
families to whom I had done some service, tried all possible means to
give me pleasure in return; and, as I refused everything, they thought
they would give me a surprise. Once I had to pay a visit to Berthenoux
for several days, on some confidential business which had been entrusted
to me; for people have come to imagine me a very clever man, so easy
is it to pass from one extreme to another. On my return I found this
garden, marked out, planted and inclosed as you see it. In vain did I
get angry, and explain that I did not want to work, that I was too old,
and that the pleasure of eating a little more fruit was not worth the
trouble that this garden was going to cost me; they finished it without
heeding what I said, and declared that I need not trouble in the least,
because they would undertake to cultivate it for me. And, indeed, for
the last two years the good folk have not failed to come, now one and
now another, and give such time in each season as was necessary to keep
it in perfect order. Besides, though I have altered nothing in my own
ways of living, the produce of this garden has been very useful; during
the winter I was able to feed several poor people with my vegetables;
while my fruit has served to win the affection of the little children,
who no longer cry out ‘wolf’ when they see me, but have grown bold
enough to come and kiss the sorcerer. Other people have forced me to
accept presents of wine, and now and then of white bread, and cheeses
of cow’s milk. All these things, however, only enable me to be polite to
the village elders when they come and report the deserving cases of the
place, so that I may make them known at the castle. These honours have
not turned my head, as you see; nay, more, I may say that when I have
done about all that I have to do, I shall leave the cares of greatness
behind me, and return to my philosopher’s life, perhaps to Gazeau
Tower--who knows?”

We were now at the end of our walk. As I set foot on the steps of the
chateau, I was suddenly filled with a feeling of devoutness; I
clasped my hands and called upon Heaven in a sort of terror. A vague,
indefinable fear arose in me; I imagined all manner of things that might
hinder my happiness. I hesitated to cross the threshold of the house;
then I rushed forward. A mist came over my eyes, a buzzing filled my
ears. I met Saint-Jean, who, not recognising me, gave a loud cry and
threw himself in my path to prevent me from entering without being
announced. I pushed him aside, and he sank down astounded on one of the
hall chairs while I hastened to the door of the drawing-room. But,
just as I was about to throw it open, I was seized with a new fear and
checked myself; then I opened it so timidly that Edmee, who was occupied
at some embroidery on a frame, did not raise her eyes, thinking that
in this slight noise she recognised the respectful Saint-Jean. The
chevalier was asleep and did not wake. This old man, tall and thin like
all the Mauprats, was sitting with his head sunk on his breast; and his
pale, wrinkled face, which seemed already wrapped in the torpor of the
grave, resembled one of those angular heads in carved oak which adorned
the back of his big arm-chair. His feet were stretched out in front of a
fire of dried vine-branches, although the sun was warm and a bright ray
was falling on his white head and making it shine like silver. And how
could I describe to you my feelings on beholding Edmee? She was bending
over her tapestry and glancing from time to time at her father to notice
his slightest movements. But what patience and resignation were revealed
in her whole attitude! Edmee was not fond of needlework; her mind was
too vigorous to attach much importance to the effect of one shade by the
side of another shade, and to the regularity of one stitch laid against
another stitch. Besides, the blood flowed swiftly in her veins, and when
her mind was not absorbed in intellectual work she needed exercise in
the open air. But ever since her father, a prey to the infirmities of
old age, had been almost unable to leave his arm-chair, she had refused
to leave him for a single moment; and, since she could not always be
reading and working her mind, she had felt the necessity of taking
up some of those feminine occupations which, as she said, “are the
amusements of captivity.” She had conquered her nature then in truly
heroic fashion. In one of those secret struggles which often take place
under our eyes without our suspecting the issue involved, she had done
more than subdue her nature, she had even changed the circulation of
her blood. I found her thinner; and her complexion had lost that first
freshness of youth which, like the bloom that the breath of morning
spreads over fruit, disappears at the slightest shock from without,
although it may have been respected by the heat of the sun. Yet in this
premature paleness and in this somewhat unhealthy thinness there seemed
to be an indefinable charm; her eyes, more sunken, but inscrutable as
ever, showed less pride and more melancholy than of old; her mouth
had become more mobile, and her smile was more delicate and less
contemptuous. When she spoke to me, I seemed to behold two persons in
her, the old and the new; and I found that, so far from having lost her
beauty, she had attained ideal perfection. Still, I remember several
persons at that time used to declare that she had “changed very much,”
 which with them meant that she had greatly deteriorated. Beauty,
however, is like a temple in which the profane see naught but the
external magnificence. The divine mystery of the artist’s thought
reveals itself only to profound sympathy, and the inspiration in each
detail of the sublime work remains unseen by the eyes of the vulgar. One
of your modern authors, I fancy, has said this in other words and much
better. As for myself, at no moment in her life did I find Edmee less
beautiful than at any other. Even in the hours of suffering, when beauty
in its material sense seems obliterated, hers but assumed a divine
form in my eyes, and in her face I beheld the splendour of a new moral
beauty. However, I am but indifferently endowed with artistic feeling,
and had I been a painter, I could not have created more than a single
type, that which filled my whole soul; for in the course of my long life
only one woman has seemed to me really beautiful; and that woman was
Edmee.

For a few seconds I stood looking at her, so touchingly pale, sad yet
calm, a living image of filial piety, of power in thrall to affection.
Then I rushed forward and fell at her feet without being able to say a
word. She uttered no cry, no exclamation of surprise, but took my head
in her two arms and held it for some time pressed to her bosom. In this
strong pressure, in this silent joy I recognised the blood of my race,
I felt the touch of a sister. The good chevalier, who had waked with a
start, stared at us in astonishment, his body bent forward and his elbow
resting on his knee; then he said:

“Well, well! What is the meaning of this?”

He could not see my face, hidden as it was in Edmee’s breast. She pushed
me towards him; and the old man clasped me in his feeble arms with a
burst of generous affection that gave him back for a moment the vigour
of youth.

I leave you to imagine the questions with which I was overwhelmed, and
the attentions that were lavished on me. Edmee was a veritable mother
to me. Her unaffected kindness and confidence savoured so much of heaven
that throughout the day I could not think of her otherwise than if I had
really been her son.

I was very much touched at the pleasure they took in preparing a big
surprise for the abbe; I saw in this a sure proof of the delight he
would feel at my return. They made me hide under Edmee’s frame, and
covered me with the large green cloth that was generally thrown over her
work. The abbe sat down quite close to me, and I gave a shout and seized
him by the legs. This was a little practical joke that I used to play
on him in the old days. When, throwing aside the frame, and sending the
balls of wool rolling over the floor, I came out from my hiding-place,
the expression of terror and delight on his face was most quaint.

But I will spare you all these family scenes to which my memory goes
back too readily.




XVII

An immense change had taken place in me during the course of six years.
I had become a man very much like other men; my instincts had managed to
bring themselves into harmony with my affections, my intuitions with my
reason. This social education had been carried on quite naturally; all
I had to do was to accept the lessons of experience and the counsels of
friendship. I was far from being a learned man; but I had developed a
power of acquiring solid learning very rapidly. My notions of things in
general were as clear as could be obtained at that time. Since then I
know that real progress has been made in human knowledge; I have watched
it from afar and have never thought of denying it. And as I notice that
not all men of my age show themselves as reasonable, it pleases me to
think that I was put on a fairly right road early in life, since I have
never stopped in the blind alley of errors and prejudices.

The progress I had made intellectually seemed to satisfy Edmee.

“I am not astonished at it,” she said. “I could see it in your letters;
but I rejoice at it with a mother’s pride.”

My good uncle was no longer strong enough to engage in the old stormy
discussions; and I really think that if he had retained his strength
he would have been somewhat grieved to find that I was no longer the
indefatigable opponent who had formerly irritated him so persistently.
He even made a few attempts at contradiction to test me; but at this
time I should have considered it a crime to have gratified him. He
showed a little temper at this, and seemed to think that I treated him
too much as an old man. To console him I turned the conversation to the
history of the past, to the years through which he himself had lived,
and questioned him on many points wherein his experience served him
better than my knowledge. In this way I obtained many healthy notions
for the guidance of my own conduct, and at the same time I fully
satisfied his legitimate _amour propre_. He now conceived a friendship
for me from genuine sympathy, just as formerly he had adopted me from
natural generosity and family pride. He did not disguise from me that
his great desire, before falling into the sleep that knows no waking,
was to see me married to Edmee; and when I told him that this was the
one thought of my life, the one wish of my soul, he said:

“I know, I know. Everything depends on her, and I think she can no
longer have any reasons for hesitation. . . . At all events,” he added,
after a moment’s silence and with a touch of peevishness, “I cannot see
any that she could allege at present.”

From these words, the first he had ever uttered on the subject which
most interested me, I concluded that he himself had long been favourable
to my suit, and that the obstacle, if one still existed, lay with Edmee.
My uncle’s last remark implied a doubt which I dared not try to clear
up, and which caused me great uneasiness. Edmee’s sensitive pride
inspired me with such awe, her unspeakable goodness filled me with such
respect that I dared not ask her point-blank to decide my fate. I made
up my mind to act as if I entertained no other hope than that she would
always let me be her brother and friend.

An event which long remained inexplicable afforded some distraction
to my thoughts for a few days. At first I had refused to go and take
possession of Roche-Mauprat.

“You really must,” my uncle had said, “go and see the improvements I
have made in your property, the lands which have been brought under
cultivation, the cattle that I have put on each of your metayer-farms.
Now is the time for you to see how your affairs stand, and show your
tenants that you take an interest in their work. Otherwise, on my death,
everything will go from bad to worse and you will be obliged to let it,
which may bring you in a larger income, perhaps, but will diminish the
value of the property. I am too old now to go and manage your estate.
For the last two years I have been unable to leave off this miserable
dressing-gown; the abbe does not understand anything about it; Edmee has
an excellent head; but she cannot bring herself to go to that place; she
says she would be too much afraid, which is mere childishness.”

“I know that I ought to display more courage,” I replied; “and yet,
uncle, what you are asking me to do is for me the most difficult thing
in the world. I have not set foot on that accursed soil since the day
I left it, bearing Edmee away from her captors. It is as if you were
driving me out of heaven to send me on a visit to hell.”

The chevalier shrugged his shoulders; the abbe implored me to bring
myself to do as he wished, as the reluctance I showed was a veritable
disappointment to my uncle. I consented, and with a determination to
conquer myself, I took leave of Edmee for two days. The abbe wanted to
accompany me, to drive away the gloomy thoughts which would no doubt
besiege me; but I had scruples about taking him from Edmee even for this
short time; I knew how necessary he was to her. Tied as she was to the
chevalier’s arm-chair, her life was so serious, so retired, that the
least change was acutely felt. Each year had increased her isolation,
and it had become almost complete since the chevalier’s failing health
had driven from his table those happy children of wine, songs, and
witticisms. He had been a great sportsman; and Saint Hubert’s Day,
which fell on his birthday, had formerly brought all the nobility of the
province to his house. Year after year the courtyards had resounded with
the howls of the pack; year after year the stables had held their two
long rows of spirited horses in their glistening stalls; year after year
the sound of the horn had echoed through the great woods around, or sent
out its blast under the windows of the big hall at each toast of the
brilliant company. But those glorious days had long disappeared; the
chevalier had given up hunting; and the hope of obtaining his daughter’s
hand no longer brought round his arm-chair young men, who were bored by
his old age, his attacks of gout, and the stories which he would repeat
in the evening without remembering that he had already told them in the
morning. Edmee’s obstinate refusals and the dismissal of M. de la Marche
had caused great astonishment, and given rise to many conjectures
among the curious. One young man who was in love with her, and had been
rejected like the rest, was impelled by a stupid and cowardly conceit to
avenge himself on the only woman of his own class who, according to him,
had dared to repulse him. Having discovered that Edmee had been carried
off by the Hamstringers, he spread a report that she had spent a night
of wild debauch at Roche-Mauprat. At best, he only deigned to concede
that she had yielded only to violence. Edmee commanded too much respect
and esteem to be accused of having shown complaisance to the brigands;
but she soon passed for having been a victim of their brutality. Marked
with an indelible stain, she was no longer sought in marriage by any
one. My absence only served to confirm this opinion. I had saved her
from death, it was said, but not from shame, and it was impossible for
me to make her my wife; I was in love with her, and had fled lest I
should yield to the temptation to marry her. All this seemed so probable
that it would have been difficult to make the public accept the true
version. They were the less ready to accept it from the fact that Edmee
had been unwilling to put an end to the evil reports by giving her
hand to a man she could not love. Such, then, were the causes of her
isolation; it was not until later that I fully understood them. But I
could see the austerity of the chevalier’s home and Edmee’s melancholy
calm, and I was afraid to drop even a dry leaf in the sleeping waters.
Thus I begged the abbe to remain with them until my return. I took no
one with me except my faithful sergeant Marcasse. Edmee had declared
that he must not leave me, and had arranged that henceforth he was to
share Patience’s elegant hut and administrative life.

I arrived at Roche-Mauprat one foggy evening in the early days of
autumn; the sun was hidden, and all Nature was wrapped in silence and
mist. The plains were deserted; the air alone seemed alive with the
noise of great flocks of birds of passage; cranes were drawing their
gigantic triangles across the sky, and storks at an immeasurable
height were filling the clouds with mournful cries, which fell upon the
saddened country like the dirge of parting summer. For the first time in
the year I felt a chilliness in the air. I think that all men are filled
with an involuntary sadness at the approach of the inclement season.
In the first hoar-frosts there is something which bids man remember the
approaching dissolution of his own being.

My companion and I had traversed woods and heaths without saying a
single word; we had made a long _detour_ to avoid Gazeau Tower, which I
felt I could not bear to look upon again. The sun was sinking in shrouds
of gray when we passed the portcullis at Roche-Mauprat. This portcullis
was broken; the drawbridge was never raised, and the only things that
crossed it now were peaceful flocks and their careless shepherds. The
fosses were half-filled, and the bluish osiers were already spreading
out their flexible branches over the shallow waters; nettles were
growing at the foot of the crumbling towers, and the traces of the
fire seemed still fresh upon the walls. The farm buildings had all been
repaired; and the court, full of cattle and poultry and sheep-dogs and
agricultural implements, contrasted strangely with the gloomy inclosure
in which I still seemed to see the red flames of the besiegers shooting
up, and the black blood of the Mauprats flowing.

I was received with the quiet and somewhat chilly hospitality of the
peasants of Berry. They did not lay themselves out to please me, but
they let me want for nothing. Quarters were found for me in the only
one of the old wings which had not been damaged in the siege, or
subsequently abandoned to the ravages of time. The massive architecture
of the body of the building dated from the tenth century; the door was
smaller than the windows, and the windows themselves gave so little
light that we had to take candles to find our way, although the sun had
hardly set. The building had been restored provisionally to serve as an
occasional lodging for the new seigneur or his stewards. My Uncle Hubert
had often been there to see to my interests so long as his strength had
allowed him; and they showed me to the room which he had reserved for
himself, and which had therefore been known as the master’s room. The
best things that had been saved from the old furniture had been placed
there; and, as it was cold and damp, in spite of all the trouble they
had taken to make it habitable, the tenant’s servant preceded me with a
firebrand in one hand and a fagot in the other.

Blinded by the smoke which she scattered round me in clouds, and
deceived by the new entrance which they had made in another part of the
courtyard, and by certain corridors which they had walled up to save the
trouble of looking after them, I reached the room without recognising
anything; indeed, I could not have said in what part of the old
buildings I was, to such an extent had the new appearance of the
courtyard upset my recollections, and so little had my mind in its gloom
and agitation been impressed by surrounding objects.

While the servant was lighting the fire, I threw myself into a chair,
and, burying my head in my hands, fell into a melancholy train of
thought. My position, however, was not without a certain charm; for the
past naturally appears in an embellished or softened form to the minds
of young men, those presumptuous masters of the future. When, by dint of
blowing the brand, the servant had filled the room with dense smoke, she
went off to fetch some embers and left me alone. Marcasse had remained
in the stable to attend to our horses. Blaireau had followed me;
lying down by the hearth, he glanced at me from time to time with a
dissatisfied air, as if to ask me the reason of such wretched lodging
and such a poor fire.

Suddenly, as I cast my eyes round the room, old memories seemed to
awaken in me. The fire, after making the green wood hiss, sent a flame
up the chimney, and the whole room was illumined with a bright
though unsteady light, which gave all the objects a weird, ambiguous
appearance. Blaireau rose, turned his back to the fire and sat down
between my legs, as if he thought that something strange and unexpected
was going to happen.

I then realized that this place was none other than my grandfather
Tristan’s bed-room, afterward occupied for several years by his eldest
son, the detestable John, my cruelest oppressor, the most crafty and
cowardly of the Hamstringers. I was filled with a sense of terror and
disgust on recognising the furniture, even the very bed with twisted
posts on which my grandfather had given up his blackened soul to God,
amid all the torments of a lingering death agony. The arm-chair which I
was sitting in was the one in which John the Crooked (as he was pleased
to call himself in his facetious days) used to sit and think out his
villainies or issue his odious orders. At this moment I thought I saw
the ghosts of all the Mauprats passing before me, with their bloody
hands and their eyes dulled with wine. I got up and was about to yield
to the horror I felt by taking to flight, when suddenly I saw a figure
rise up in front of me, so distinct, so recognisable, so different in
its vivid reality from the chimeras that had just besieged me, that I
fell back in my chair, all bathed in a cold sweat. Standing by the
bed was John Mauprat. He had just got out, for he was holding the
half-opened curtain in his hand. He seemed to me the same as formerly,
only he was still thinner, and paler and more hideous. His head was
shaved, and his body wrapped in a dark winding-sheet. He gave me a
hellish glance; a smile full of hate and contempt played on his thin,
shrivelled lips. He stood motionless with his gleaming eyes fixed on me,
and seemed as if about to speak. In that instant I was convinced that
what I was looking on was a living being, a man of flesh and blood; it
seems incredible, therefore, that I should have felt paralyzed by such
childish fear. But it would be idle for me to deny it, nor have I ever
yet been able to find an explanation; I was riveted to the ground with
fear. The man’s glance petrified me; I could not utter a sound. Blaireau
rushed at him; then he waved the folds of his funeral garment, like a
shroud all foul with the dampness of the tomb, and I fainted.

When I recovered consciousness Marcasse was by my side, anxiously
endeavouring to lift me. I was lying on the ground rigid as a corpse. It
was with a great difficulty that I collected my thoughts; but, as soon
as I could stand upright, I seized Marcasse and hurriedly dragged him
out of the accursed room. I had several narrow escapes of falling as
I hastened down the winding stairs, and it was only on breathing the
evening air in the courtyard, and smelling the healthy odour of the
stables, that I recovered the use of my reason.

I did not hesitate to look upon what had just happened as an
hallucination. I had given proof of my courage in war in the presence of
my worthy sergeant; I did not blush, therefore, to confess the truth
to him. I answered his questions frankly, and I described my horrible
vision with such minute details that he, too, was impressed with the
reality of it, and, as he walked about with me in the courtyard, kept
repeating with a thoughtful air:

“Singular, singular! Astonishing!”

“No, it is not astonishing,” I said, when I felt that I had quite
recovered. “I experienced a most painful sensation on my way here;
for several days I had struggled to overcome my aversion to seeing
Roche-Mauprat again. Last night I had a nightmare, and I felt so
exhausted and depressed this morning that, if I had not been afraid of
offending my uncle, I should have postponed this disagreeable visit. As
we entered the place, I felt a chill come over me; there seemed to be a
weight on my chest, and I could not breathe. Probably, too, the pungent
smoke that filled the room disturbed my brain. Again, after all the
hardships and dangers of our terrible voyage, from which we have hardly
recovered, either of us, is it astonishing that my nerves gave way at
the first painful emotion?”

“Tell me,” replied Marcasse, who was still pondering the matter, “did
you notice Blaireau at the moment? What did Blaireau do?”

“I thought I saw Blaireau rush at the phantom at the moment when it
disappeared; but I suppose I dreamt that like the rest.”

“Hum!” said the sergeant. “When I entered, Blaireau was wildly excited.
He kept coming to you, sniffing, whining in his way, running to the
bed, scratching the wall, coming to me, running to you. Strange, that!
Astonishing, captain, astonishing, that!”

After a silence of a few moments:

“Devil don’t return!” he exclaimed, shaking his head. “Dead never
return; besides, why dead, John? Not dead! Still two Mauprats! Who
knows? Where the devil? Dead don’t return; and my master--mad? Never.
Ill? No.”

After this colloquy the sergeant went and fetched a light, drew his
faithful sword from the scabbard, whistled Blaireau, and bravely seized
the rope which served as a balustrade for the staircase, requesting me
to remain below. Great as was my repugnance to entering the room again,
I did not hesitate to follow Marcasse, in spite of his recommendation.
Our first care was to examine the bed; but while we had been talking in
the courtyard the servant had brought clean sheets, had made the bed,
and was now smoothing the blankets.

“Who has been sleeping there?” asked Marcasse, with his usual caution.

“Nobody,” she replied, “except M. le Chevalier or M. l’Abbe Aubert, in
the days when they used to come.”

“But yesterday, or to-day, I mean?” said Marcasse.

“Oh! yesterday and to-day, nobody, sir; for it is quite two years since
M. le Chevalier came here; and as for M. l’Abbe, he never sleeps here,
now that he comes alone. He arrives in the morning, has lunch with us,
and goes back in the evening.”

“But the bed was disarranged,” said Marcasse, looking at her
attentively.

“Oh, well! that may be, sir,” she replied. “I do not know how they left
it the last time some one slept here; I did not pay any attention to
that as I put on the sheets; all I know is that M. Bernard’s cloak was
lying on the top.”

“My cloak?” I exclaimed. “It was left in the stable.”

“And mine, too,” said Marcasse. “I have just folded both together and
put them on the corn-bin.”

“You must have had two, then,” replied the servant; “for I am sure I
took one off the bed. It was a black cloak, not new.”

Mine, as a fact, was lined with red and trimmed with gold lace.
Marcasse’s was light gray. It could not, therefore, have been one of
our cloaks brought up for a moment by the man and then taken back to the
stable.

“But, what did you do with it?” said the sergeant.

“My word, sir,” replied the fat girl, “I put it there, over the
arm-chair. You must have taken it while I went to get a candle. I can’t
see it now.”

We searched the room thoroughly; the cloak was not to be found. We
pretended that we needed it, not denying that it was ours. The servant
unmade the bed in our presence, and then went and asked the man what
he had done with it. Nothing could be found either in the bed or in the
room; the man had not been upstairs. All the farm-folk were in a state
of excitement, fearing that some one might be accused of theft. We
inquired if a stranger had not come to Roche-Mauprat, and if he was
not still there. When we ascertained that these good people had neither
housed or seen any one, we reassured them about the lost cloak by saying
that Marcasse had accidentally folded it with the two others. Then we
shut ourselves in the room, in order to explore it at our ease; for it
was now almost evident that what I had seen was by no means a ghost, but
John Mauprat himself, or a man very like him, whom I had mistaken for
John.

Marcasse having aroused Blaireau by voice and gesture, watched all his
movements.

“Set your mind at rest,” he said with pride; “the old dog has not
forgotten his old trade. If there is a hole, a hole as big as your hand,
have no fear. Now, old dog! Have no fear.”

Blaireau, indeed, after sniffing everywhere, persisted in scratching the
wall where I had seen the apparition; he would start back every time his
pointed nose came to a certain spot in the wainscotting; then, wagging
his bushy tail with a satisfied air, he would return to his master as if
to tell him to concentrate his attention on this spot. The sergeant then
began to examine the wall and the woodwork; he tried to insinuate his
sword into some crack; there was no sign of an opening. Still, a door
might have been there, for the flowers carved on the woodwork would hide
a skilfully constructed sliding panel. The essential thing was to find
the spring that made this panel work; but that was impossible in spite
of all the efforts we made for two long hours. In vain did we try to
shake the panel; it gave forth the same sound as the others. They were
all sonorous, showing that the wainscot was not in immediate contact
with the masonry. Still, there might be a gap of only a few inches
between them. At last Marcasse, perspiring profusely, stopped, and said
to me:

“This is very stupid; if we searched all night we should not find a
spring if there is none; and however hard we hammered, we could not
break in the door if there happened to be big iron bars behind it, as I
have sometimes seen in other old country-houses.”

“The axe might help us to find a passage,” I said, “if there is one; but
why, simply because your dog scratches the wall, persist in believing
that John Mauprat, or the man who resembles him, could not have come in
and gone out by the door?”

“Come in, if you like,” replied Marcasse, “but gone out--no, on my
honour! For, as the servant came down I was on the staircase brushing my
boots. As soon as I heard something fall here, I rushed up quickly three
stairs at a time, and found that it was you--like a corpse, stretched
out on the floor, very ill; no one inside nor outside, on my honour!

“In that case, then, I must have dreamt of my fiend of an uncle, and the
servant must have dreamt of the black cloak; for it is pretty certain
that there is no secret door here; and even if there were one, and all
the Mauprats, living and dead, knew the secret of it, what were that to
us? Do we belong to the police that we should hunt out these wretched
creatures? And if by chance we found them hidden somewhere, should we
not help them to escape, rather than hand them over to justice? We are
armed; we need not be afraid that they will assassinate us to-night; and
if they amuse themselves by frightening us, my word, woe betide them!
I have no eye for either relatives or friends when I am startled in my
sleep. So come, let us attack the omelette that these good people my
tenants are preparing for us; for if we continue knocking and scratching
the walls they will think we are mad.”

Marcasse yielded from a sense of duty rather than from conviction. He
seemed to attach great importance to the discovery of this mystery, and
to be far from easy in his mind. He was unwilling to let me remain alone
in the haunted room, and pretended that I might fall ill again and have
a fit.

“Oh, this time,” I said, “I shall not play the coward. The cloak has
cured me of my fear of ghosts; and I should not advise any one to meddle
with me.”

The hildago was obliged to leave me alone. I loaded my pistols and put
them on the table within reach of my hand; but these precautions were a
pure waste of time; nothing disturbed the silence of the room, and
the heavy red silk curtains, with their coat of arms at the corners in
tarnished silver, were not stirred by the slightest breath. Marcasse
returned and, delighted at finding me as cheerful as he had left me,
began preparing our supper with as much care as if we had come to
Roche-Mauprat for the sole purpose of making a good meal. He made jokes
about the capon which was still singing on the spit, and about the wine
which was so like a brush in the throat. His good humour increased when
the tenant appeared, bringing a few bottles of excellent Madeira, which
had been left with him by the chevalier, who liked to drink a glass or
two before setting foot in the stirrup. In return we invited the worthy
man to sup with us, as the least tedious way of discussing business
matters.

“Good,” he said; “it will be like old times when the peasants used to
eat at the table of the seigneurs of Roche-Mauprat. You are doing the
same, Monsieur Bernard, you are quite right.”

“Yes, sir,” I replied very coldly; “only I behave thus with those who
owe me money, not those to whom I owe it.”

This reply, and the word “sir,” frightened him so much that he was at
great pains to excuse himself from sitting down to table. However, I
insisted, as I wished to give him the measure of my character at once. I
treated him as a man I was raising to my own level, not as one to whom I
wished to descend. I forced him to be cleanly in his jokes, but allowed
him to be free and facetious within the limits of decent mirth. He was
a frank, jovial man. I questioned him minutely to discover if he was
not in league with the phantom who was in the habit of leaving his cloak
upon the bed. This, however, seemed far from probable; the man evidently
had such an aversion for the Hamstringers, that, had not a regard for
my relationship held him back, he would have been only too glad to have
given them such a dressing in my presence as they deserved. But I could
not allow him any license on this point; so I requested him to give me
an account of my property, which he did with intelligence, accuracy, and
honesty.

As he withdrew I noticed that the Madeira had had considerable effect on
him; he seemed to have no control over his legs, which kept catching
in the furniture; and yet he had been in sufficient possession of his
faculties to reason correctly. I have always observed that wine acts
much more powerfully on the muscles of peasants than on their nerves;
that they rarely lose their heads, and that, on the contrary, stimulants
produce in them a bliss unknown to us; the pleasure they derive from
drunkenness is quite different from ours and very superior to our
febrile exaltation.

When Marcasse and I found ourselves alone, though we were not drunk, we
realized that the wine had filled us with gaiety and light-heartedness
which we should not have felt at Roche-Mauprat, even without the
adventure of the ghost. Accustomed as we were to speak our thoughts
freely, we confessed mutually, and agreed that we were much better
prepared than before supper to receive all the bogies of Varenne.

This word “bogey” reminded me of the adventure which had brought me into
far from friendly contact with Patience at the age of thirteen. Marcasse
knew about it already, but he knew very little of my character at that
time, and I amused myself by telling him of my wild rush across the
fields after being thrashed by the sorcerer.

“This makes me think,” I concluded by saying, “that I have an
imagination which easily gets overexcited, and that I am not above fear
of the supernatural. Thus the apparition just now . . .”

“No matter, no matter,” said Marcasse, looking at the priming of my
pistols, and putting them on the table by my bed. “Do not forget that
all the Hamstringers are not dead; that, if John is in this world, he
will do harm until he is under the ground, and trebly locked in hell.”

The wine was loosening the hidalgo’s tongue; on those rare occasions
when he allowed himself to depart from his usual sobriety, he was not
wanting in wit. He was unwilling to leave me, and made a bed for himself
by the side of mine. My nerves were excited by the incidents of the day,
and I allowed myself, therefore, to speak of Edmee, not in such a way as
to deserve the shadow of a reproach from her if she had heard my words,
but more freely than I might have spoken with a man who was as yet my
inferior and not my friend, as he became later. I could not say exactly
how much I confessed to him of my sorrows and hopes and anxieties; but
those confidences had a disastrous effect, as you will soon see.

We fell asleep while we were talking, with Blaireau at his master’s
feet, the hidalgo’s sword across his knees near the dog, the light
between us, my pistols ready to hand, my hunting-knife under my pillow,
and the bolts shot. Nothing disturbed our repose. When the sun awakened
us the cocks were crowing merrily in the courtyard, and the labourers
were cracking their rustic jokes as they yoked the oxen under our
windows.

“All the same there is something at the bottom of it.”

Such was Marcasse’s first remark as he opened his eyes, and took up the
conversation where he had dropped it the night before.

“Did you see or hear anything during the night?” I asked.

“Nothing at all,” he replied. “All the same, Blaireau has been disturbed
in his sleep; for my sword has fallen down; and then, we found no
explanation of what happened here.”

“Let who will explain it,” I answered. “I shall certainly not trouble
myself.”

“Wrong, wrong; you are wrong!”

“That may be, my good sergeant; but I do not like this room at all, and
it seems to me so ugly by daylight, that I feel that I must get far away
from it, and breathe some pure air.”

“Well, I will go with you; but I shall return. I do not want to leave
this to chance. I know what John Mauprat is capable of; you don’t.”

“I do not wish to know; and if there is any danger here for myself or my
friends, I do not wish you to return.”

Marcasse shook his head and said nothing. We went round the farm once
more before departing. Marcasse was very much struck with a certain
incident to which I should have paid but little attention. The farmer
wished to introduce me to his wife, but she could not be persuaded to
see me, and went and hid herself in the hemp-field. I attributed this to
the shyness of youth.

“Fine youth, my word!” said Marcasse; “youth like mine fifty years old
and more! There is something beneath it, something beneath, I tell you.”

“What the devil can there be?”

“Hum! She was very friendly with John Mauprat in her day. She found
his crooked legs to her liking. I know about it; yes, I know many other
things, too; many things--you may take my word!”

“You shall tell me them the next time we come; and that will not be so
soon; for my affairs are going on much better than if I interfered with
them; and I should not like to get into the habit of drinking Madeira
to prevent myself from being frightened at my own shadow. And now,
Marcasse, I must ask you as a favour not to tell any one what has
happened. Everybody has not your respect for your captain.”

“The man who does not respect my captain is an idiot,” answered the
hidalgo, in a tone of authority; “but, if you order me, I will say
nothing.”

He kept his word. I would not on any account have had Edmee’s mind
disturbed by this stupid tale. However, I could not prevent Marcasse
from carrying out his design; early the following morning he
disappeared, and I learnt from Patience that he had returned to
Roche-Mauprat under the pretence of having forgotten something.




XVIII

While Marcasse was devoting himself to serious investigations, I was
spending days of delight and agony in Edmee’s presence. Her behaviour,
so constant and devoted, and yet in many respects so reserved, threw me
into continual alternations of joy and grief. One day while I was taking
a walk the chevalier had a long conversation with her. I happened to
return when their discussion had reached its most animated stage. As
soon as I appeared, my uncle said to me:

“Here, Bernard; come and tell Edmee that you love her; that you will
make her happy; that you have got rid of your old faults. Do something
to get yourself accepted; for things cannot go on as they are. Our
position with our neighbours is unbearable; and before I go down to the
grave I should like to see my daughter’s honour cleared from stain, and
to feel sure that some stupid caprice of hers will not cast her into a
convent, when she ought to be filling that position in society to which
she is entitled, and which I have worked all my life to win for her.
Come, Bernard, at her feet, lad! Have the wit to say something that will
persuade her! Otherwise I shall think--God forgive me!--that it is you
that do not love her and do not honestly wish to marry her.”

“I! Great heavens!” I exclaimed. “Not wish to marry her--when for seven
years I have had no other thought; when that is the one wish of my
heart, and the only happiness my mind can conceive!”

Then I poured forth all the thoughts that the sincerest passion could
suggest. She listened to me in silence, and without withdrawing her
hands, which I covered with kisses. But there was a serious expression
in her eyes, and the tone of her voice made me tremble when, after
reflecting a few moments, she said:

“Father, you should not doubt my word; I have promised to marry Bernard;
I promised him, and I promised you; it is certain, therefore, that I
shall marry him.”

Then she added, after a fresh pause, and in a still severe tone:

“But if, father, you believe that you are on the brink of the grave,
what sort of heart do you suppose I can have, that you bid me think only
of myself, and put on my wedding-dress in the hour of mourning for you?
If, on the contrary, you are, as I believe, still full of vigour, in
spite of your sufferings, and destined to enjoy the love of your family
for many a long year yet, why do you urge me so imperiously to cut
short the time I have requested? Is not the question important enough
to demand my most serious reflection? A contract which is to bind me for
the rest of my life, and on which depends, I do not say my happiness,
for that I would gladly sacrifice to your least wish, but the peace
of my conscience and the dignity of my conduct (since no woman can
be sufficiently sure of herself to answer for a future which has been
fettered against her will), does not such a contract bid me weigh all
its risks and all its advantages for several years at least?”

“Good God!” said the chevalier. “Have you not been weighing all this for
the last seven years? You ought to have arrived at some conclusion about
your cousin by now. If you are willing to marry him, marry him; but if
not, for God’s sake say so, and let another man come forward.”

“Father,” replied Edmee, somewhat coldly, “I shall marry none but him.”

“‘None but him’ is all very well,” said the chevalier, tapping the logs
with the tongs; “but that does not necessarily mean that you will marry
him.”

“Yes, I will marry him, father,” answered Edmee. “I could have wished
to be free a few months more; but since you are displeased at all these
delays, I am ready to obey your orders, as you know.”

“Parbleu! that is a pretty way of consenting,” exclaimed my uncle, “and
no doubt most gratifying to your cousin! By Jove! Bernard, I have lived
many years in this world, but I must own that I can’t understand these
women yet, and it is very probable that I shall die without ever having
understood them.”

“Uncle,” I said, “I can quite understand my cousin’s aversion for me; it
is only what I deserve. I have done all I could to atone for my errors.
But, is it altogether in her power to forget a past which has doubtless
caused her too much pain? However, if she does not forgive me, I will
imitate her severity: I will not forgive myself. Abandoning all hope in
this world, I will tear myself away from her and you, and chasten myself
with a punishment worse than death.”

“That’s it! Go on! There’s an end of everything!” said the chevalier,
throwing the tongs into the fire. “That is just what you have been
aiming at, I suppose, Edmee?”

I had moved a few steps towards the door; I was suffering intensely.
Edmee ran after me, took me by the arm, and brought me back towards her
father.

“It is cruel and most ungrateful of you to say that,” she said. “Does
it show a modest spirit and generous heart, to forget a friendship, a
devotion, I may even venture to say, a fidelity of seven years, because
I ask to prove you for a few months more? And even if my affection for
you should never be as deep as yours for me, is what I have hitherto
shown you of so little account that you despise it and reject it,
because you are vexed at not inspiring me with precisely as much as you
think you are entitled to? You know at this rate a woman would have no
right to feel affection. However, tell me, is it your wish to punish
me for having been a mother to you by leaving me altogether, or to make
some return only on condition that I become your slave?”

“No, Edmee, no,” I replied, with my heart breaking and my eyes full of
tears, as I raised her hand to my lips; “I feel that you have done far
more for me than I deserved; I feel that it would be idle to think of
tearing myself from your presence; but can you account it a crime in me
to suffer by your side? In any case it is so involuntary, so inevitable
a crime, that it must needs escape all your reproaches and all my own
remorse. But let us talk of this no more. It is all I can do. Grant me
your friendship still; I shall hope to show myself always worthy of you
in the future.”

“Come, kiss each other,” said the chevalier, much affected, “and never
separate. Bernard, however capricious Edmee may seem, never abandon
her, if you would deserve the blessing of your foster-father. Though you
should never be her husband, always be a brother to her. Remember, my
lad, that she will soon be alone in the world, and that I shall die
in sorrow if I do not carry with me to the grave a conviction that a
support and a defender still remains to her. Remember, too, that it is
on your account, on account of a vow, which her inclination, perhaps,
would reject, but which her conscience respects, that she is thus
forsaken and slandered . . .”

The chevalier burst into tears, and in a moment all the sorrows of the
unfortunate family were revealed to me.

“Enough, enough!” I cried, falling at their feet. “All this is too
cruel. I should be the meanest wretch on earth if I had need to be
reminded of my misdeeds and my duties. Let me weep at your knees; let
me atone for the wrong I have done you by eternal grief, by eternal
renunciation. Why not have driven me away when I did the wrong? Why not,
uncle, have blown out my brains with your pistol, as if I had been a
wild beast? What have I done to be spared, I who repaid your kindness
with the ruin of your honour? No, no; I can see that Edmee ought not to
marry me; that would be accepting the shame of the insult I have drawn
upon her. All I ask is to be allowed to remain here; I will never see
her face, if she makes this a condition; but I will lie at her door like
a faithful dog and tear to pieces the first man who dares to present
himself otherwise than on his knees; and if some day an honest man,
more fortunate than myself, shows himself worthy of her love, far
from opposing him, I will intrust to him the dear and sacred task of
protecting and vindicating her. I will be but a friend, a brother to
her, and when I see that they are happy together, I will go far away
from them and die in peace.”

My sobs choked me; the chevalier pressed his daughter and myself to his
heart, and we mingled our tears, swearing to him that we would never
leave each other, either during his life or after his death.

“Still, do not give up all hope of marrying her,” whispered the
chevalier to me a few moments later, when we were somewhat calmer. “She
has strange whims; but nothing will persuade me to believe that she does
not love you. She does not want to explain matters yet. Woman’s will is
God’s will.”

“And Edmee’s will is my will,” I replied.

A few days after this scene, which brought the calmness of death into
my soul in place of the tumult of life, I was strolling in the park with
the abbe.

“I must tell you,” he said, “of an adventure which befell me yesterday.
There is a touch of romance in it. I had been for a walk in the woods of
Briantes, and had made my way down to the spring of Fougeres. It was
as warm, you remember, as in the middle of summer; and our beautiful
plants, in their autumn red, seemed more beautiful than ever as they
stretched their delicate tracery over the stream. The trees have very
little foliage left; but the carpet of dried leaves one walks upon gives
forth a sound which to me is full of charm. The satiny trunks of the
birches and young oaks are covered with moss and creepers of all shades
of brown, and tender green, and red and fawn, which spread out into
delicate stars and rosettes, and maps of all countries, wherein the
imagination can behold new worlds in miniature. I kept gazing lovingly
on these marvels of grace and delicacy, these arabesques in which
infinite variety is combined with unfailing regularity, and as I
remembered with pleasure that you are not, like the vulgar, blind to
these adorable coquetries of nature, I gathered a few with the greatest
care, even bringing away the bark of the tree on which they had taken
root, in order not to destroy the perfection of their designs. I made
a little collection, which I left at Patience’s as I passed; we will
go and see them, if you like. But, on our way, I must tell you what
happened to me as I approached the spring. I was walking upon the wet
stones with my head down, guided by the slight noise of the clear little
jet of water which bursts from the heart of the mossy rock. I was about
to sit down on the stone which forms a natural seat at the side of it,
when I saw that the place was already occupied by a good friar whose
pale, haggard face was half-hidden by his cowl of coarse cloth. He
seemed much frightened at my arrival; I did my best to reassure him by
declaring that my intention was not to disturb him, but merely to put my
lips to the little bark channel which the woodcutters have fixed to the
rock to enable one to drink more easily.

“‘Oh, holy priest,’ he said to me in the humblest tone, ‘why are you
not the prophet whose rod could smite the founts of grace? and why
cannot my soul, like this rock, give forth a stream of tears?’

“Struck by the manner in which this monk expressed himself, by his sad
air, by his thoughtful attitude in this poetic spot, which has often
made me dream of the meeting of the Saviour and the woman of Samaria, I
allowed myself to be drawn into a more intimate conversation. I
learnt from the monk that he was a Trappist, and that he was making a
penitential tour.

“‘Ask neither my name nor whence I come,’ he said. ‘I belong to an
illustrious family who would blush to know that I am still alive.
Besides, on entering the Trappist order, we abjure all pride in the
past; we make ourselves like new-born children; we become dead to the
world that we may live again in Jesus Christ. But of this be sure: you
behold in me one of the most striking examples of the miraculous power
of grace; and if I could make known to you the tale of my religious
life, of my terrors, my remorse, and my expiations, you would certainly
be touched by it. But of what avail the indulgence and compassion of
man, if the pity of God will not deign to absolve me?’

“You know,” continued the abbe, “that I do not like monks, that I
distrust their humility and abhor their lives of inaction. But this man
spoke in so sad and kindly a manner; he was so filled with a sense
of his duty; he seemed so ill, so emaciated by asceticism, so truly
penitent, that he won my heart. In his looks and in his talk were bright
flashes which betrayed a powerful intellect, indefatigable energy, and
indomitable perseverance. We spent two whole hours together, and I was
so moved by what he said that on leaving him I expressed a wish to see
him again before he left this neighbourhood. He had found a lodging for
the night at the Goulets farm, and I tried in vain to persuade him to
accompany me to the chateau. He told me that he had a companion he could
not leave.

“‘But, since you are so sympathetic,’ he said, ‘I shall esteem it a
pleasure to meet you here to-morrow towards sunset; perhaps I may
even venture to ask a favour of you; you can be of service to me in an
important matter which I have to arrange in this neighbourhood; more
than this I cannot tell you at the present moment.’

“I assured him that he could reckon on me, and that I should only be too
happy to oblige a man such as himself.”

“And the result is, I suppose, that you are waiting impatiently for the
hour of your appointment?” I said to the abbe.

“I am,” he replied; “and my new acquaintance has so many attractions for
me that, if I were not afraid of abusing the confidence he has placed in
me, I should take Edmee to the spring of Fougeres.”

“I fancy,” I replied, “that Edmee has something better to do than to
listen to the declamations of your monk, who perhaps, after all, is only
a knave, like so many others to whom you have given money blindly. You
will forgive me, I know, abbe; but you are not a good physiognomist, and
you are rather apt to form a good or bad opinion of people for no reason
except that your own romantic nature happens to feel kindly or timidly
disposed towards them.”

The abbe smiled and pretended that I said this because I bore him a
grudge; he again asserted his belief in the Trappist’s piety, and then
went back to botany. We passed some time at Patience’s, examining the
collection of plants; and as my one desire was to escape from my own
thoughts, I left the hut with the abbe and accompanied him as far as the
wood where he was to meet the monk. In proportion as we drew near to
the place the abbe seemed to lose more and more of his eagerness of the
previous evening, and even expressed a fear that he had gone too
far. This hesitation, following so quickly upon enthusiasm, was very
characteristic of the abbe’s mobile, loving, timid nature, with its
strange union of the most contrary impulses, and I again began to rally
him with all the freedom of friendship.

“Come, then,” he said, “I should like to be satisfied about this; you
must see him. You can study his face for a few minutes, and then leave
us together, since I have promised to listen to his secrets.”

As I had nothing better to do I followed the abbe; but as soon as we
reached a spot overlooking the shady rocks whence the water issues,
I stopped and examined the monk through the branches of a clump of
ash-trees. Seated immediately beneath us by the side of the spring, he
had his eyes turned inquiringly on the angle of the path by which he
expected the abbe to arrive; but he did not think of looking at the
place where we were, and we could examine him at our ease without being
seen by him.

No sooner had I caught sight of him than, with a bitter laugh, I took
the abbe by the arm, drew him back a short distance, and, not without
considerable agitation, said to him:

“My dear abbe, in bygone years did you never catch sight of the face of
my uncle, John de Mauprat?”

“Never, as far as I know,” replied the abbe, quite amazed. “But what are
you driving at?”

“Only this, my friend; you have made a pretty find here; this good
and venerable Trappist, in whom you see so much grace and candour, and
contrition, and intelligence, is none other than John de Mauprat, the
Hamstringer.”

“You must be mad!” cried the abbe, starting back. “John de Mauprat died
a long time ago.”

“John Mauprat is not dead, nor perhaps Antony Mauprat either; and my
surprise is less than yours only because I have already met one of these
two ghosts. That he has become a monk, and is repenting for his sins,
is very possible; but alas! it is by no means impossible that he has
disguised himself in order to carry out some evil design, and I advise
you to be on your guard.”

The abbe was so frightened that he no longer wanted to keep his
appointment. I suggested that it would be well to learn what the old
sinner was aiming at. But, as I knew the abbe’s weak character, and
feared that my Uncle John would manage to win his heart by his lying
confessions and wheedle him into some false step, I made up my mind to
hide in a thicket whence I could see and hear everything.

But things did not happen as I had expected. The Trappist, instead of
playing the politician, immediately made known his real name to the
abbe. He declared that he was full of contrition, and that, as his
conscience would not allow him to make the monk’s habit a refuge from
punishment (he had really been a Trappist for several years), he was
about to put himself into the hands of justice, that he might atone in
a striking way for the crimes with which he was polluted. This man,
endowed as he was with conspicuous abilities, had acquired a
mystic eloquence in the cloister. He spoke with so much grace and
persuasiveness that I was fascinated no less than the abbe. It was in
vain that the latter attempted to combat a resolution which appeared
to him insane; John Mauprat showed the most unflinching devotion to his
religious ideas. He declared that, having committed the crimes of the
old barbarous paganism, he could not ransom his soul save by a public
expiation worthy of the early Christians.

“It is possible,” he said, “to be a coward with God as well as with man,
and in the silence of my vigils I hear a terrible voice answering to my
tears: ‘Miserable craven, it is the fear of man that has thrown you upon
the bosom of God, and if you had not feared temporal death, you would
never have thought of life eternal!’

“Then I realize that what I most dread is not God’s wrath, but the rope
and the hangman that await me among my fellows. Well, it is time to end
this sense of secret shame; not until the day when men crush me beneath
their abuse and punishment shall I fell absolved and restored in the
sight of Heaven; then only shall I account myself worthy to say to Jesus
my Saviour: ‘Give ear to me, innocent victim, Thou who heardest the
penitent thief; give ear to a sullied but contrite victim, who has
shared in the glory of Thy martyrdom and been ransomed by Thy blood!’”

“If you persist in your enthusiastic design,” said the abbe, after
unsuccessfully bringing forward all possible objections, “you must at
least let me know in what way you thought I could be of service to you.”

“I cannot act in this matter,” replied the Trappist, “without the
consent of a young man who will soon be the last of the Mauprats; for
the chevalier has not many days to wait before he will receive the
heavenly reward due to his virtues; and as for myself, I cannot avoid
the punishment I am about to seek, except by falling back into the
endless night of the cloister. I speak of Bernard Mauprat; I will not
call him my nephew, for if he heard me he would blush to think that he
bore this shameful title. I heard of his return from America, and this
news decided me to undertake the journey at the painful end of which you
now behold me.”

It seemed to me that while he was saying this he kept casting
side-glances towards the clump of trees where I was, as if he had
guessed my presence there. Perhaps the movement of some branches had
betrayed me.

“May I ask,” said the abbe, “what you now have in common with this young
man? Are you not afraid that, embittered by the harsh treatment formerly
lavished on him at Roche-Mauprat, he may refuse to see you?”

“I am certain that he will refuse; for I know the hatred that he still
has for me,” said the Trappist, once more looking towards the spot where
I was. “But I hope that you will persuade him to grant me an interview;
for you are a good and generous man, Monsieur l’Abbe. You promised to
oblige me; and, besides, you are young Mauprat’s friend, and you will
be able to make him understand that his interests are at stake and the
honour of his name.”

“How so?” answered the abbe. “No doubt he will be far from pleased to
see you appear before the courts to answer for crimes which have since
been effaced in the gloom of the cloister. He will certainly wish you to
forego this public expiation. How can you hope that he will consent?”

“I have hope, because God is good and great; because His grace is
mighty; because it will touch the heart of him who shall deign to hear
the prayer of a soul which is truly penitent and deeply convinced;
because my eternal salvation is in the hands of this young man, and he
cannot wish to avenge himself on me beyond the grave. Moreover, I must
die at peace with those I have injured; I must fall at the feet of
Bernard Mauprat and obtain his forgiveness of my sins. My tears will
move him, or, if his unrelenting soul despises them, I shall at least
have fulfilled an imperious duty.”

Seeing that he was speaking with a firm conviction that he was being
heard by me, I was filled with disgust; I thought I could detect the
deceit and cowardice that lay beneath this vile hypocrisy. I moved away
and waited for the abbe some distance off. He soon rejoined me; the
interview had ended by a mutual promise to meet again soon. The abbe had
undertaken to convey the Trappist’s words to me, while the latter had
threatened in the most honeyed tone in the world to come and see me if I
refused his request. The abbe and I agreed to consult together, without
informing the chevalier or Edmee, that we might not disquiet them
unnecessarily. The Trappist had gone to stay at La Chatre, at the
Carmelite convent; this had thoroughly aroused the abbe’s suspicions,
in spite of his first enthusiasm at the penitence of the sinner. The
Carmelites had persecuted him in his youth, and in the end the prior
had driven him to secularize himself. The prior was still alive, old
but implacable; infirm, and withdrawn from the world, but strong in his
hatred, and his passion for intrigue. The abbe could not hear his name
without shuddering, and he begged me to act prudently in this affair.

“Although John Mauprat,” he said, “is under the bane of the law, and you
are at the summit of honour and prosperity, do not despise the weakness
of your enemy. Who knows what cunning and hatred may do? They can usurp
the place of the just and cast him out on the dung-heap; they can
fasten their crimes on others and sully the robe of innocence with their
vileness. Maybe you have not yet finished with the Mauprats.”

The poor abbe did not know that there was so much truth in his words.




XIX

After thoroughly reflecting on the Trappist’s probable intentions, I
decided that I ought to grant him the interview he had requested. In any
case, John Mauprat could not hope to impose upon me, and I wished to do
all in my power to prevent him from pestering my great-uncle’s last days
with his intrigues. Accordingly, the very next day I betook myself
to the town, where I arrived towards the end of Vespers. I rang, not
without emotion, at the door of the Carmelites.

The retreat chosen by the Trappist was of those innumerable mendicant
societies which France supported at that time. Though its rules
were ostensibly most austere, this monastery was rich and devoted to
pleasure. In that age of scepticism the small number of the monks was
entirely out of proportion to the wealth of the establishment which
had been founded for them; and the friars who roamed about the vast
monasteries in the most remote parts of the provinces led the easiest
and idlest lives they had ever known, in the lap of luxury, and entirely
freed from the control of opinion, which always loses its power when man
isolates himself. But this isolation, the mother of the “amiable vices,”
 as they used to phrase it, was dear only to the more ignorant. The
leaders were a prey to the painful dreams of an ambition which had been
nurtured in obscurity and embittered by inaction. To do something, even
in the most limited sphere and with the help of the feeblest machinery;
to do something at all costs--such was the one fixed idea of the priors
and abbes.

The prior of the Carmelites whom I was about to see was the
personification of this restless impotence. Bound to his great arm-chair
by the gout, he offered a strange contrast to the venerable chevalier,
pale and unable to move like himself, but noble and patriarchal in his
affliction. The prior was short, stout, and very petulant. The upper
part of his body was all activity; he would turn his head rapidly from
side to side; he would brandish his arms while giving orders. He was
sparing of words, and his muffled voice seemed to lend a mysterious
meaning to the most trivial things. In short, one-half of his person
seemed to be incessantly striving to drag along the other, like the
bewitched man in the Arabian Nights, whose robe hid a body that was
marble up to the waist.

He received me with exaggerated attention, got angry because they did
not bring me a chair quickly enough, stretched out his fat, flabby hand
to draw this chair quite close to his own, and made a sign to a tall,
bearded satyr, whom he called the Brother Treasurer, to go out; then,
after overwhelming me with questions about my journey, and my return,
and my health, and my family, while his keen restless little eyes
were darting glances at me from under eyelids swollen and heavy from
intemperance, he came to the point.

“I know, my dear child,” he said, “what brings you here; you wish to
pay your respects to your holy relative, to the Trappist, that model of
faith and holiness whom God has sent to us to serve as an example to the
world, and reveal to all the miraculous power of grace.”

“Prior,” I answered, “I am not a good enough Christian to judge of the
miracle you mention. Let devout souls give thanks to Heaven for it. For
myself, I have come here because M. Jean de Mauprat desires to inform
me, as he has said, of plans which concern myself, and to which I am
ready to listen. If you will allow me to go and see him----”

“I did not want him to see you before myself, young man,” exclaimed the
prior, with an affectation of frankness, at the same time seizing my
hands in his, at the touch of which I could not repress a feeling of
disgust. “I have a favour to ask of you in the name of charity, in the
name of the blood which flows in your veins . . .”

I withdrew one of my hands, and the prior, noticing my expression of
displeasure, immediately changed his tone with admirable skill.

“You are a man of the world, I know. You have a grudge against him who
once was Jean de Mauprat, and who to-day is the humble Brother Jean
Nepomucene. But if the precepts of our divine Master, Jesus Christ,
cannot persuade you to pity, there are considerations of public
propriety and of family pride which must make you share my fears and
assist my efforts. You know the pious but rash resolution which Brother
John has formed; you ought to assist me in dissuading him from it, and
you will do so, I make no doubt.”

“Possibly, sir,” I replied very coldly; “but might I ask to what my
family is indebted for the interest you are good enough to take in its
affairs?”

“To that spirit of charity which animates all the followers of Christ,”
 answered the monk, with very well assumed dignity.

Fortified with this pretext, on the strength of which the clergy have
always taken upon themselves to meddle in all family secrets, it was not
difficult for him to put an end to my questions; and, though he could
not destroy the suspicions which I felt at heart, he succeeded in
proving to my ears that I ought to be grateful to him for the care which
he had taken of the honour of my name. I wanted to find out what he was
driving at; it was as I had foreseen. My Uncle John claimed from me his
share in the fief of Roche-Mauprat; and the prior was deputed to make
me understand that I had to choose between paying a considerable sum of
money (for he spoke of the interest accruing through the seven years of
possession, besides a seventh part of the whole estate) and the insane
step he intended taking, the scandal of which could not fail to
hasten the chevalier’s death and cause me, perhaps, “strange personal
embarrassments.” All this was hinted with consummate skill under the
cover of the most Christian solicitude for my own welfare, the most
fervent admiration for the Trappist’s zeal, and the most sincere anxiety
about the results of this “firm resolve.” Finally, it was made evident
that John Mauprat was not coming to ask me for the means of existence,
but that I should have to humbly beseech him to accept the half of
my possessions, if I wished to prevent him from dragging my name and
probably my person to the felon’s dock.

I tried a final objection.

“If,” I said, “this resolve of Brother Nepomucene, as you call him, is
as fixed as you say; if the only one care he has in the world is for his
own salvation, will you explain to me how the attractions of temporal
wealth can possibly turn him from it? There seems to be a contradiction
in this which I fail to understand.”

The prior was somewhat embarrassed by the piercing glance I turned
on him, but he immediately started on one of those exhibitions of
simplicity which are the supreme resource of rogues:

“Mon Dieu! my dear son,” he exclaimed, “you do not know, then, the
immense consolation a pious soul can derive from the possession of
worldly wealth? Just as perishable riches must be despised when they
represent vain pleasures, even so must they be resolutely defended by
the upright man when they afford him the means of doing good. I will
not hide from you that if I were the holy Trappist I would not yield my
rights to any one; I would found a religious society for the propagation
of the faith and the distribution of alms with the wealth which, in the
hands of a brilliant young nobleman like yourself, is only squandered on
horses and dogs. The Church teaches us that by great sacrifices and
rich offerings we may cleanse our souls of the blackest sins. Brother
Nepomucene, a prey to holy fear, believes that a public expiation is
necessary for his salvation. Like a devout martyr, he wishes to satisfy
the implacable justice of men with blood. But how much sweeter for you
(and safer, at the same time) to see him raise some holy altar to the
glory of God, and hide in the blessed peace of the cloister the baleful
lustre of the name he has already abjured! He is so much swayed by the
spirit of his order, he has conceived such a love for self-denial, for
humility and poverty, that it will need all my efforts and much help
from on high to make him agree to this change of expiations.”

“It is you, then, prior, who from sheer goodness of heart are
undertaking to alter this fatal resolution? I admire your zeal, and I
thank you for it; but I do not think there will be any need of all these
negotiations. M. Jean de Mauprat claims his share of the inheritance;
nothing can be more just. Even should the law refuse all civil rights
to a man who owed his safety only to flight (a point which I will pass
over), my relative may rest assured that there would never be the least
dispute between us on this ground, if I were the absolute possessor
of any fortune whatever. But you are doubtless aware that I owe the
enjoyment of this fortune only to the kindness of my great-uncle, the
Chevalier Hubert de Mauprat; that he had enough to do to pay the debts
of the family, which amounted to more than the total value of the
estate; that I can alienate nothing without his permission, and that,
in reality, I am merely the depositary of a fortune which I have not yet
accepted.”

The prior stared at me in astonishment, as if dazed by an unexpected
blow. Then he smiled with a crafty expression, and said:

“Very good! It appears that I have been mistaken, and that I must apply
to M. Hubert de Mauprat. I will do so; for I make no doubt that he will
be very grateful to me for saving his family from a scandal which may
have very good results for one of his relatives in the next world, but
which, for a certainty, will have very bad ones for another relation in
the present world.”

“I understand, sir,” I replied. “This is a threat. I will answer in the
same strain: If M. Jean de Mauprat ventures to importune my uncle and
cousin, it is with me that he will have to deal; and it will not be
before the courts that I shall summon him to answer for certain outrages
which I have by no means forgotten. Tell him that I shall grant no
pardon to the Trappist penitent unless he remains faithful to the role
he has adopted. If M. Jean de Mauprat is without resources, and he asks
my help, I may, out of the income I receive, furnish him with the means
of living humbly and decently, according to the spirit of the vows he
has taken; but if ecclesiastical ambition has taken possession of his
mind, and he thinks, by stupid, childish threats, to intimidate my
uncle to such an extent that he will be able to extort from him the
wherewithal to satisfy his new tastes, let him undeceive himself--tell
him so from me. The old man’s peace of mind and his daughter’s future
have only myself as guardian, and I shall manage to guard them, though
it be at the risk of my life and my honour.”

“And yet honour and life are of some importance at your age,” replied
the abbe, visibly irritated, but feigning a suaver manner than ever.
“Who knows into what folly religious fervour may lead the Trappist?
For, between ourselves be it said, my child--you see, I am a man of
moderation--I knew the world in my youth, and I do not approve of these
violent resolves, which are more often dictated by pride than piety.
For instance, I have consented to temper the austerity of our rules; my
friars look well-fed, and they wear shirts. Rest assured, my good sir, I
am far from approving of your uncle’s design, and I shall do all that
is possible to hinder it. Yet, if he still persists, how will my efforts
profit you? He has obtained his superior’s permission, and may, after
all, yield to his fatal inspiration. You may be seriously compromised by
an affair of this kind; for, although reports say that you are a worthy
young gentleman, though you have abjured the errors of the past, and
though, perhaps, your soul has always hated iniquity, you have certainly
been involved in many misdeeds which human laws condemn and punish. Who
can tell into what involuntary revelations Brother Nepomucene may
find himself drawn if he sets in motion the machinery of criminal
proceedings? Can he set it in motion against himself without at the same
time setting it in motion against you? Believe me, I wish for peace--I
am a kindly man.”

“Yes, a very kindly man, father,” I answered, in a tone of irony. “I see
that perfectly. But do not let this matter cause you needless anxiety;
for there is one very clear argument which must reassure both of us. If
a veritable religious impulse urges Brother John the Trappist to make a
public reparation, it will be easy to make him understand that he ought
to hesitate before he drags another than himself into the abyss; the
spirit of Christ forbids him to do this. But, if the truth is, as I
presume, that M. Jean de Mauprat has not the least wish to hand himself
over to justice, his threats are but little calculated to terrify me,
and I shall take steps to prevent them from making more stir than is
desirable.”

“So that is the only answer I am to give him?” asked the prior, darting
a vindictive glance at me.

“Yes, sir,” I replied; “unless he would prefer to come here and receive
the answer from my own mouth. I came with a determination to conquer
the disgust which his presence arouses in me; and I am astonished that,
after expressing so much eagerness to see me, he should remain in the
background when I arrive.”

“Sir,” answered the prior, with ridiculous majesty, “my duty is to see
that the peace of our Lord reigns in this holy place. I must,
therefore, set myself against any interview which might lead to violent
explanations . . .”

“You are much too easily frightened, sir,” I replied. “There is nothing
to arouse passion in this matter. However, as it was not I who called
for these explanations, and as I came here out of pure compliance, I
most willingly refrain from pushing them further, and I thank you for
having been good enough to act as intermediary.”

With that, I made a profound bow and retired.




XX

I gave an account of this interview to the abbe, who was waiting for
me at Patience’s. He was entirely of my own opinion; he thought, like
myself, that the prior, so far from endeavouring to turn the Trappist
from his pretended designs, was trying with all his power to frighten
me, in the hope that I should be brought to make considerable sacrifices
of money. In his eyes it was clear that this old man, faithful to the
monkish spirit, wished to put into the hands of a clerical Mauprat the
fruit of the labours and thrift of a lay Mauprat.

“That is the indelible mark of the Catholic clergy,” he said. “They
cannot live without waging war on the families around them, and being
ever on the watch for opportunities to spoil them. They look upon this
wealth as their property, and upon all ways of recovering it as lawful.
It is not as easy as you think to protect one’s self against this
smooth-faced brigandage. Monks have stubborn appetites and ingenious
minds. Act with caution and be prepared for anything. You can never
induce a Trappist to show fight. Under the shelter of his hood, with
head bowed and hands crossed, he will accept the cruelest outrages; and,
knowing quite well that you will not assassinate him, he will hardly
fear you. Again, you do not know what justice can become in man’s
hands, and how a criminal trial is conducted and decided when one of
the parties will not stick at any kind of bribery and intimidation.
The Church is powerful, the law grandiloquent. The words ‘honesty’ and
‘integrity’ have for centuries been ringing against the hardened walls
of courts of justice; but that has not prevented judges from being
false or verdicts from being iniquitous. Have a care; have a care! The
Trappist may start the cowled pack on his own track and throw them off
by disappearing at the right point and leading them on yours. Remember
that you have wounded many an _amour propre_ by disappointing the
pretensions of the dowry-hunters. One of the most incensed of them,
and at the same time one of the most malicious, is a near relative of a
magistrate who is all-powerful in the province. De la Marche has given
up the gown for the sword; but among his old colleagues he may have left
some one who would like to do you an ill-turn. I am sorry you were not
able to join him in America, and get on good terms with him. Do not
shrug your shoulders; you may kill a dozen of them, and things will
go from bad to worse. They will avenge themselves; not on your life,
perhaps, for they know that you hold that cheap, but on your honour; and
your great-uncle will die of grief. In short--”

“My dear abbe,” I said, interrupting him, “you have a habit of seeing
everything black at the first glance, when you do not happen to see the
sun in the middle of the night. Now let me tell you some things which
ought to drive out these gloomy presentiments. I know John Mauprat of
old; he is a signal impostor, and, moreover, the rankest of cowards. He
will sink into the earth at the sight of me, and as soon as I speak I
will make him confess that he is neither Trappist, nor monk, nor saint.
All this is a mere sharper’s trick. In the old days I have heard him
making plans which prevent me from being astonished at his impudence
now; so I have but little fear of him.”

“There you are wrong,” replied the abbe. “You should always fear a
coward, because he strikes from behind while you are expecting him in
front. If John Mauprat were not a Trappist, if the papers he showed me
were lies, the prior of the Carmelites is too shrewd and cautious to
have let himself be deceived. Never would he have espoused the cause of
a layman, and never would he mistake a layman for one of his own cloth.
However, we must make inquiries; I will write to the superior of the
Trappist monastery at once, but I am certain he will confirm what I know
already. It is even possible that John Mauprat is a genuine devotee.
Nothing becomes such a character better than certain shades of the
Catholic spirit. The inquisition is the soul of the Church, and the
inquisition should smile on John Mauprat. I firmly believe that he
would give himself up to the sword of justice solely for the pleasure
of compassing your ruin with his own, and that the desire to found a
monastery with your money is a sudden inspiration, the honour of which
belongs entirely to the prior of the Carmelites . . .”

“That is hardly probable, my dear abbe,” I said. “Besides, where can
these discussions lead us? Let us act. Let us keep the chevalier in
sight, so that the unclean beast may not come and poison the calm of his
last days. Write to the Trappist superior; I will offer the creature
a pension, and when he comes, let us carefully watch his slightest
movements. My sergeant, Marcasse, is an admirable bloodhound. Let us put
him on the track, and if he can manage to tell us in vulgar speech what
he has seen and heard, we shall soon know everything that is happening
in the province.”

Chatting thus, we arrived at the chateau towards the close of day. As
I entered the silent building, I was seized with a fond, childish
uneasiness, such as may come upon a mother when she leaves her babe a
moment. The eternal security which nothing had ever disturbed within the
bounds of the old sacred walls, the decrepitude of the servants, the way
in which the doors always stood open, so that beggars would sometimes
enter the drawing-room without meeting any one and without giving
umbrage--the whole atmosphere of peace and trust and isolation--formed
a strange contrast to the thoughts of strife, and the cares with which
John’s return and the prior’s threats had filled my mind for some
hours. I quickened my pace, and, seized with an involuntary trembling, I
crossed the billiard-room. At that moment I thought I saw a dark shadow
pass under the windows of the ground floor, glide through the jasmines,
and disappear in the twilight. I threw open the door of the drawing-room
and stood still. There was not a sound, not a movement. I was going
to look for Edmee in her father’s room, when I thought I saw something
white moving near the chimney-corner where the chevalier always sat.

“Edmee! Is that you?” I exclaimed.

No one answered. My brow was covered with a cold sweat and my knees
were trembling. Ashamed of this strange weakness, I rushed towards the
hearth, repeating Edmee’s name in agonized tones.

“Have you come at last, Bernard?” she replied, in a trembling voice.

I seized her in my arms. She was kneeling beside her father’s arm-chair
and pressing to her lips the old man’s icy hands.

“Great God!” I cried, when by the dim light in the room I could
distinguish the chevalier’s livid face. “Is our father dead?”

“Perhaps,” she said, in a stifled voice; “perhaps he has only fainted,
please God! But, a light, for Heaven’s sake! Ring the bell! He has only
been in this state for a moment.”

I rang in all haste. The abbe now came in, and fortunately we succeeded
in bringing my uncle back to life.

But when he opened his eyes, his mind seemed to be struggling against
the impressions of a fearful dream.

“Has he gone? Has the vile phantom gone?” he repeated several times.
“Ho, there, Saint-Jean! My pistols! Now, my men! Throw the fellow out of
the window!”

I began to suspect the truth.

“What has happened?” I said the Edmee, in a low tone. “Who has been here
in my absence?”

“If I told you,” answered Edmee, “you would hardly believe it. You
would think my father and I were mad. But I will tell you everything
presently; let us attend to him.”

With her soft words and loving attentions she succeeded in calming the
old man. We carried him to his room, and he fell into a quiet sleep.
When Edmee had gently withdrawn her hand from his and lowered the wadded
curtain over his head, she joined the abbe and myself, and told us that
a quarter of an hour before we returned a mendicant friar had entered
the drawing-room, where, as usual, she was embroidering near her
father, who had fallen asleep. Feeling no surprise at an incident
which frequently happened, she had risen to get her purse from the
mantel-piece, at the same time addressing a few words to the monk. But
just as she was turning round to offer him an alms the chevalier had
awakened with a start, and eyeing the monk from head to foot, had cried
in a tone half of anger and half of fear:

“What the devil are you doing here in that garb?”

Thereupon Edmee had looked at the monk’s face and had recognised . . .

“A man you would never dream of,” she said; “the frightful John Mauprat.
I had only seen him a single hour in my life, but that repulsive face
has never left my memory, and I have never had the slightest attack of
fever without seeing it again. I could not repress a cry.

“‘Do not be afraid,’ he said, with a hideous smile. ‘I come here not as
an enemy, but as a supplicant.’

“And he went down on his knees so near my father, that, not knowing
what he might do, I rushed between them, and hastily pushed back the
arm-chair to the wall. Then the monk, speaking in a mournful tone, which
was rendered still more terrifying by the approach of night, began to
pour out some lamentable rigmarole of a confession, and ended by asking
pardon for his crimes, and declaring that he was already covered by the
black veil which parricides wear when they go to the scaffold.

“‘This wretched creature has gone mad,’ said my father, pulling the
bell-rope.

“But Saint-Jean is deaf, and he did not come. So we had to sit in
unspeakable agony and listen to the strange talk of the man who calls
himself a Trappist and declares that he had come to give himself up to
justice in expiation of his transgressions. Before doing so, he wished
to implore my father’s forgiveness and his last blessing. While saying
this he was moving forward on his knees, and speaking with an intense
passion. In the sound of this voice, uttering words of extravagant
humility, there seemed to be insult and a menace. As he continued moving
nearer to my father, and as the idea of the foul caresses which he
apparently wished to lavish on him filled me with disgust, I ordered
him in a somewhat imperious tone to rise and speak becomingly. My father
angrily ordered him to say no more and depart; and as at this moment
he cried, ‘No, you must let me clasp your knees!’ I pushed him back to
prevent him from touching my father. I shudder to think that my glove
has touched that unclean gown. He turned towards me, and, though he
still feigned penitence and humility, I could see rage gleaming in his
eyes. My father made a violent effort to get up, and in fact he got up,
as if by a miracle; but the next instant he fell back fainting in his
chair. Then steps were heard in the billiard-room, and the monk rushed
out by the glass door with the speed of lightning. It was then that you
found me half-dead and frozen with terror at the feet of my prostate
father.”

“The abominable coward has lost no time, you see, abbe,” I cried. “His
aim was to frighten the chevalier and Edmee, and he has succeeded; but
he reckoned without me, and I swear that--though he should have to be
treated in the Roche-Mauprat fashion--if he ever dares to come here
again----”

“That is enough, Bernard,” said Edmee. “You make me shudder. Speak
seriously, and tell me what all this means.”

When I had informed her of what had happened to the abbe and myself, she
blamed us for not warning her.

“Had I known,” she said, “what to expect I should not have been
frightened, and I could have taken care never to be left alone in the
house with my father, and Saint-Jean, who is hardly more active. Now,
however, I am no longer afraid; I shall be on my guard. But the best
thing, Bernard dear, is to avoid all contact with this loathsome man,
and to make him as liberal an allowance as possible to get rid of him.
The abbe is right; he may prove formidable. He knows that our kinship
with him must always prevent us from summoning the law to protect us
against his persecutions; and though he cannot injure us as seriously
as he flatters himself, he can at least cause us a thousand annoyances,
which I am reluctant to face. Throw him gold and let him take himself
off. But do not leave me again, Bernard; you see you have become
absolutely necessary to me; brood no more over the wrong you pretend to
have done me.”

I pressed her hand in mine, and vowed never to leave her, though she
herself should order me, until this Trappist had freed the country from
his presence.

The abbe undertook the negotiations with the monastery. He went into
the town the following day, carrying from me a special message to the
Trappist that I would throw him out of the window if he ever took it
into his head to appear at Sainte-Severe again. At the same time I
proposed to supply him with money, even liberally, on condition that
he would immediately withdraw to his convent or to any other secular
or religious retreat he might choose, and that he would never again set
foot in Berry.

The prior received the abbe with all the signs of profound contempt and
holy aversion for his state of heresy. Far from attempting to wheedle
him like myself, he told him that he wished to have nothing to do with
this business, that he washed his hands of it, and that he would confine
himself to conveying the decisions on both sides, and affording a refuge
to Brother Nepomucene, partly out of Christian charity, and partly to
edify his monks by the example of a truly devout man. According to him,
Brother Nepomucene would be the second of that name placed in the front
rank of the heavenly host by virtue of the canons of the Church.

The next day the abbe was summoned to the convent by a special
messenger, and had an interview with the Trappist. To his great
surprise, he found that the enemy had changed his tactics. He
indignantly refused help of any sort, declaring that his vow of poverty
and humility would not allow it; and he strongly blamed his dear host,
the prior, for daring to suggest, without his consent, an exchange
of things eternal for things temporal. On other matters he refused to
explain his views, and took refuge in ambiguous and bombastic replies.
God would inspire him, he said, and at the approaching festival of the
Virgin, at the august and sublime hour of holy communion, he expected to
hear the voice of Jesus speaking to his heart and announcing the line of
conduct he ought to follow. The abbe was afraid of betraying uneasiness,
if he insisted on probing this “Christian mystery,” so he returned with
this answer, which was least of all calculated to reassure me. He did
not appear again either at the castle or in the neighbourhood, and kept
himself so closely shut up in the convent that few people ever saw his
face. However, it soon became known, and the prior was most active in
spreading the news, that John Mauprat had been converted to the most
zealous and exemplary piety, and was now staying at the Carmelite
convent for a term, as a penitent from La Trappe. Every day they
reported some fresh virtuous trait, some new act of austerity of this
holy personage. Devotees, with a thirst for the marvellous, came to see
him, and brought him a thousand little presents, which he obstinately
refused. At times he would hide so well that people said he had returned
to his monastery; but just as we were congratulating ourselves on
getting rid of him, we would hear that he had recently inflicted some
terrible mortifications on himself in sackcloth and ashes; or else that
he had gone barefooted on a pilgrimage into some of the wildest and most
desolate parts of Varenne. People went so far as to say that he could
work miracles. If the prior had not been cured of his gout, that was
because, in a spirit of true penitence, he did not wish to be cured.

This state of uncertainty lasted almost two months.




XXI

These days, passed in Edmee’s presence, were for me days of delight, yet
of suffering. To see her at all hours, without fear of being indiscreet,
since she herself would summon me to her side, to read to her, talk with
her on all subjects, share the loving attentions she bestowed on her
father, enter into half her life exactly as if we had been brother
and sister--this was great happiness, no doubt, but it was a dangerous
happiness, and again the volcano kindled in my breast. A few confused
words, a few troubled glances betrayed me. Edmee was by no means blind,
but she was impenetrable; her dark and searching eyes, fixed on me as
on her father, with the solicitude of an absorbing affection, would at
times suddenly grow cold, just as the violence of my passion was ready
to break out. Her countenance would then express nothing but patient
curiosity and an unswerving resolve to read to the bottom of my soul
without letting me see even the surface of her own.

My sufferings, though acute, were dear to me at first; it pleased me to
think that I was secretly offering them to Edmee as an expiation of my
past faults. I hoped that she would perceive this and be satisfied with
me. She saw it, and said nothing. My agony grew more intense; but still
some days passed before I lost all power to hide it. I say days, because
whoever has loved a woman, and has been much alone with her, yet always
kept in check by her severity, must have found days like centuries. How
full life seemed and yet how consuming! What languor and unrest! What
tenderness and rage! It was as though the hours were years; and at this
very day, if I did not bring in dates to rectify the error of my memory,
I could easily persuade myself that these two months filled half my
life.

Perhaps, too, I should like to persuade myself of this, in order to find
some excuse for the foolish and culpable conduct into which I fell in
spite of all the good resolutions which I had but lately formed. The
relapse was so sudden and complete that I should still blush at the
thought, if I had not cruelly atoned for it, as you will soon see.

After a night of agony, I wrote her an insane letter which came nigh to
producing terrible consequences for me; it was somewhat as follows:

“You do not love me, Edmee; you will never love me. I know this; I
ask for nothing, I hope for nothing. I would only remain near you and
consecrate my life to your service and defence. To be useful to you
I will do all that my strength will allow; but I shall suffer, and,
however I try to hide it, you will see it; and perhaps you will
attribute to wrong causes the sadness I may not be able to suppress with
uniform heroism. You pained me deeply yesterday, when you advised me to
go out a little ‘to distract my thoughts.’ To distract my thoughts from
you, Edmee! What bitter mockery! Do not be cruel, sister; for then you
become my haughty betrothed of evil days again . . . and, in spite of
myself, I again become the brigand whom you used to hate. . . . Ah, if
you knew how unhappy I am! In me there are two men who are incessantly
waging a war to the death. It is to be hoped that the brigand will fall;
but he defends himself step by step, and he cries aloud because he feels
himself covered with wounds and mortally stricken. If you knew, Edmee,
if you only knew what struggles, what conflicts, rend my bosom; what
tears of blood my heart distils; and what passions often rage in that
part of my nature which the rebel angels rule! There are nights when I
suffer so much that in the delirium of my dreams I seem to be plunging
a dagger into your heart, and thus, by some sombre magic, to be forcing
you to love me as I love you. When I awake, in a cold sweat, bewildered,
beside myself, I feel tempted to go and kill you, so as to destroy the
cause of my anguish. If I refrain from this, it is because I fear that
I should love you dead with as much passion and tenacity as if you were
alive. I am afraid of being restrained, governed, swayed by your image
as I am by your person. Then, again, a man cannot destroy the being he
loves and fears; for when she has ceased to exist on earth she still
exists in himself. It is the lover’s soul which serves as a coffin for
his mistress and which forever preserves her burning remains, that it
may feed on them without ever consuming them. But, great Heaven! what is
this tumult in my thoughts? You see, Edmee, to what an extent my mind is
sick; take pity on me, then. Bear with me, let me be sad, never doubt my
devotion. I am often mad, but I worship you always. A word, a look from
you, will always recall me to a sense of duty, and this duty will be
sweet when you deign to remind me of it. As I write to you, Edmee, the
sky is full of clouds that are darker and heavier than lead; the thunder
is rumbling, and doleful ghosts of purgatory seem to be floating in
the glare of the lightning. The weight of the storm lies on my soul; my
bewildered mind quivers like the flashes which leap from the firmament.
It seems as if my whole being were about to burst like the tempest. Ah,
could I but lift up to you a voice like unto its voice! Had I the power
to lay bare the agonies and passions which rend me within! Often, when a
storm has been sweeping over the great oaks above, you have told me
that you enjoy gazing upon the fury of the one and the resistance of the
other. This, you say, is a battle of mighty forces; and in the din in
the air you fancy you can detect the curses of the north wind and the
mournful cries of the venerable branches. Which suffers the more, Edmee,
the tree which resists, or the wind which exhausts itself in the attack?
Is it not always the wind that yields and falls? And then the sky,
grieved at the defeat of her noble son, sheds a flood of tears upon
the earth. You love these wild images, Edmee; and whenever you behold
strength vanquished by resistance you smile cruelly, and there is a look
in your inscrutable eyes that seems to insult my misery. Well, you have
cast me to the ground, and, though shattered, I still suffer; yes,
learn this, since you wish to know it, since you are merciless enough
to question me and to feign compassion. I suffer, and I no longer try
to remove the foot which the proud conqueror has placed on my broken
heart.”

The rest of this letter, which was very long, very rambling and absurd
from beginning to end, was in the same strain. It was not the first time
that I had written to Edmee, though I lived under the same roof, and
never left her except during the hours of rest. My passion possessed me
to such a degree that I was irresistibly drawn to encroach upon my sleep
in order to write to her, I could never feel that I had talked enough
about her, that I had sufficiently renewed my promises of submission--a
submission in which I was constantly failing. The present letter,
however, was more daring and more passionate than any of the others.
Perhaps, in some mysterious way, it was written under the influence of
the storm which was rending the heavens while I, bent over my table,
with moist brow and dry, burning hand, drew this frenzied picture of my
sufferings. A great calm, akin to despair, seemed to come over me as
I threw myself upon my bed after going down to the drawing-room and
slipping my letter into Edmee’s work-basket. Day was breaking, and the
horizon showed heavy with the dark wings of the storm, which was flying
to other regions. The trees, laden with rain, were tossing under the
breeze, which was still blowing freshly. Profoundly sad, but blindly
resigned to my suffering, I fell asleep with a sense of relief, as if I
had made a sacrifice of my life and hopes. Apparently Edmee did not find
my letter, for she gave me no answer. She generally replied verbally,
and these letters of mine were a means of drawing from her those
professions of sisterly friendship with which I had perforce to be
satisfied, and which, at least, poured soothing balm into my wound.
I ought to have known that this time my letter must either lead to a
decisive explanation, or be passed over in silence. I suspected the abbe
of having taken it and thrown it into the fire; I accused Edmee of scorn
and cruelty; nevertheless, I held my tongue.

The next day the weather was quite settled again. My uncle went for a
drive, and during the course of it told us that he should not like to
die without having had one last great fox-hunt. He was passionately
devoted to this sport, and his health had so far improved that he again
began to show a slight inclination for pleasure and exercise. Seated in
a very light, narrow _berline_, drawn by strong mules, so that he might
move rapidly over the sandy paths in our woods, he had already followed
one or two little hunts which we had arranged for his amusement. Since
the Trappist’s visit, the chevalier had entered, as it were, upon a
fresh term of life. Endowed with strength and pertinacity, like all his
race, it seemed as if he had been decaying for want of excitement, for
the slightest demand on his energy immediately set his stagnant blood
in motion. As he was very much pleased with this idea of a hunt, Edmee
undertook to organize, with my help, a general battue and to join in the
sport herself. One of the greatest delights of the good old man was
to see her on horseback, as she boldly pranced around his carriage and
offered him all the flowering sprigs which she plucked from the bushes
she passed. It was arranged that I should ride with her, and that
the abbe should accompany the chevalier in the carriage. All the
gamekeepers, foresters, huntsmen, and even poachers of Varenne were
invited to this family function. A splendid meal was prepared with many
goose-pies and much local wine. Marcasse, whom I had made my manager
at Roche-Mauprat, and who had a considerable knowledge of the art of
fox-hunting, spent two whole days in stopping up the earths. A few young
farmers in the neighbourhood, interested in the battue and able to give
useful advice, graciously offered to join the party; and, last of all,
Patience, in spite of his aversion for the destruction of innocent
animals, consented to follow the hunt as a spectator. On the appointed
day, which opened warm and cloudless on our happy plans and my own
implacable destiny, some fifty individuals met with horns, horses, and
hounds. At the end we were to play havoc with the rabbits, of which
there were too many on the estate. It would be easy to destroy them
wholesale by falling back upon that part of the forest which had not
been beaten during the hunt. Each man therefore armed himself with a
carbine, and my uncle also took one, to shoot from his carriage, which
he could still do with much skill.

Edmee was mounted on a very spirited Limousin mare, which she amused
herself by exciting and quieting with a touching coquetry to please her
old father. For the first two hours she hardly left the carriage at all,
and the chevalier, now full of new life, gazed on her with smiles and
tears of love. Just as in the daily rotation of our globe, ere passing
into night, we take leave of the radiant orb which is going to reign
over another hemisphere, even so did the old man find some consolation
for his death in the thought that the youth and vigour and beauty of his
daughter were surviving him for another generation.

When the hunt was in full swing, Edmee, who certainly inherited some of
the martial spirit of the family, and the calmness of whose soul
could not always restrain the impetuosity of her blood, yielded to
her father’s repeated signs--for his great desire now was to see her
gallop--and went after the field, which was already a little distance
ahead.

“Follow her! follow her!” cried the chevalier, who had no sooner seen
her galloping off than his fond paternal vanity had given place to
uneasiness.

I did not need to be told twice; and digging my spurs into my horse’s
flanks, I rejoined Edmee in a cross-path which she had taken to come up
with the hunt. I shuddered as I saw her bending like a reed under the
branches, while her horse, which she was still urging on, carried her
between the trees with the rapidity of lightning.

“For God’s sake, Edmee,” I cried, “do not ride so fast! You will be
killed!”

“Let me have a gallop,” she said gaily. “My father has allowed me. You
must not interfere; I shall rap you on the knuckles if you try to stop
my horse.”

“At least let me follow you, then,” I said, keeping close to her.
“Your father wished it; and I shall at least be there to kill myself if
anything happens to you.”

Why I was filled with these gloomy forebodings I do not know, for I had
often seen Edmee galloping through the woods. I was in a peculiar
state; the heat of noon seemed mounting to my brain, and my nerves were
strangely excited. I had eaten no breakfast, as I had felt somewhat out
of sorts in the morning, and, to sustain myself, had swallowed several
cups of coffee mixed with rum. At first I experienced a horrible
sense of fear; then, after a few minutes, the fear gave way to an
inexpressible feeling of love and delight. The excitement of the gallop
became so intense that I imagined my only object was to pursue Edmee.
To see her flying before me, as light as her own black mare, whose feet
were speeding noiselessly over the moss, one might have taken her for a
fairy who had suddenly appeared in this lonely spot to disturb the mind
of man and lure him away to her treacherous haunts. I forgot the hunt
and everything else. I saw nothing but Edmee; then a mist fell upon
my eyes, and I could see her no more. Still, I galloped on; I was in a
state of silent frenzy, when she suddenly stopped.

“What are we doing?” she said. “I cannot hear the hunt any longer, and
here is the river in front. We have come too far to the left.”

“No, no, Edmee,” I answered, without knowing in the least what I was
saying. “Another gallop and we shall be there.”

“How red you are!” she said. “But how shall we cross the river?”

“Since there is a road, there must be a ford,” I replied. “Come on! come
on!”

I was filled with an insane desire to go on galloping, I believe my idea
was to plunge deeper and deeper into the forest with her; but this idea
was wrapped in a haze, and when I tried to pierce it, I was conscious of
nothing but a wild throbbing of my breast and temples.

Edmee made a gesture of impatience.

“These woods are accursed!” she said. “I am always losing my way in
them.”

No doubt she was thinking of the fatal day when she had been carried far
from another hunt and brought to Roche-Mauprat. I thought of it too,
and the ideas that came into my mind produced a sort of dizziness. I
followed her mechanically towards the river. Suddenly I realized that
she was on the other bank. I was filled with rage on seeing that her
horse was cleverer and braver than my own. Before I could get the animal
to take the ford, which was rather a nasty one, Edmee was a long way
ahead of me again. I dug my spurs into its sides till the blood streamed
from them. At last, after being nearly thrown several times, I reached
the other bank, and, blind with rage, started in pursuit of Edmee. I
overtook her, and seizing the mare’s bridle, I exclaimed:

“Stop, Edmee, I say! You shall not go any farther.”

At the same time I shook the reins so violently that her horse reared.
She lost her balance, and, to avoid falling, jumped lightly to the
ground between our two animals, at the risk of being hurt. I was on
the ground almost as soon as herself. I at once pushed the horses away.
Edmee’s, which was very quiet, stopped and began to browse. Mine bolted
out of sight. All this was the affair of an instant.

I had caught Edmee in my arms; she freed herself and said, in a sharp
tone:

“You are very brutal, Bernard; and I hate these ways of yours. What is
the matter with you?”

Perplexed and confused, I told her that I thought her mare was bolting,
and that I was afraid some accident might happen to her if she allowed
herself to be carried away by the excitement of the ride.

“And to save me,” she replied, “you make me fall, at the risk of killing
me! Really, that was most considerate of you.”

“Let me help you to mount again,” I said.

And without waiting for her permission, I took her in my arms and lifted
her off the ground.

“You know very well that I do not mount in this way!” she exclaimed, now
quite irritated. “Leave me alone; I don’t want your help.”

But I was no longer in a state to obey her. I was losing my head;
my arms were tightening around her waist, and it was in vain that I
endeavoured to take them away. My lips touched her bosom in spite of
myself. She grew pale with anger.

“Oh, how unfortunate I am!” I said, with my eyes full of tears; “how
unfortunate I am to be always offending you, and to be hated more and
more in proportion as my love for you grows greater!”

Edmee was of an imperious and violent nature. Her character, hardened by
trials, had every year developed greater strength. She was no longer the
trembling girl making a parade of courage, but in reality more ingenuous
than bold, whom I had clasped in my arms at Roche-Mauprat. She was now a
proud, fearless woman, who would have let herself be killed rather than
give the slightest countenance to an audacious hope. Besides, she was
now the woman who knows that she is passionately loved and is conscious
of her power. She repulsed me, therefore, with scorn; and as I followed
her distractedly, she raised her whip and threatened to leave a mark of
ignominy on my face if I dared to touch even her stirrup.

I fell on my knees and begged her not to leave me thus without forgiving
me. She was already in her saddle, and, as she looked round for the way
back, she exclaimed:

“That was the one thing wanting--to behold this hateful spot again! Do
you see where we are?”

I looked in my turn, and saw that we were on the edge of the forest,
quite close to the shady little pond at Gazeau. A few yards from
us, through the trees which had grown denser since Patience left, I
perceived the door of the tower, opening like a big black mouth behind
the green foliage.

I was seized with a fresh dizziness. A terrible struggle was taking
place between two instincts. Who shall explain the mysterious workings
of man’s brain when his soul is grappling with the senses, and one part
of his being is striving to strangle the other? In an organization like
mine, such a conflict, believe me, was bound to be terrible; and do not
imagine that the will makes but a feeble resistance in natures carried
away by passion; it is idiotic to say to a man who lies spent with such
struggles, “You ought to have conquered yourself.”




XXII

How shall I describe to you what I felt at the unexpected sight of
Gazeau Tower? I had seen it but twice in my life; each time I had taken
part in a painfully stirring scene there. Yet these scenes were as
naught beside the one awaiting me on this third encounter; there must be
a curse on certain places.

I fancied I could still see the blood of the two Mauprats sprinkled on
the shattered door. Their life of crime and their tragic end made me
shudder at the violent instincts which I felt in myself. I was filled
with a horror of my own feelings, and I understood why Edmee did not
love me. But, as if yonder deplorable blood had power to stir a
fatal sympathy, I felt the wild strength of my passion increasing in
proportion as my will made greater efforts to subdue it. I had trampled
down all other passions; scarcely a trace of them remained in me. I was
sober; if not gentle and patient, I was at least capable of affection
and sympathy; I had a profound sense of the laws of honour, and the
highest respect for the dignity of others. Love, however, was still the
most formidable of my enemies; for it was inseparably connected with all
that I had acquired of morality and delicacy; it was the tie that
bound the old man to the new, an indissoluble tie, which made it almost
impossible for me to find the golden mean between reason and passion.

Standing before Edmee, who was about to leave me behind and on foot;
furious at seeing her escape me for the last time (since after the
insult I had just offered her she would doubtless never run the risk of
being alone with me again), I gazed on her with a terrible expression.
I was livid; my fists were clinched. I had but to resolve, and the
slightest exertion of my strength would have snatched her from her
horse, thrown her to the ground and left her at the mercy of my desires.
I had but to let my old savage instincts reign for a second and I could
have slaked, extinguished the fires which had been consuming me for
seven years. Never did Edmee know the danger her honour ran in that
minute of agony, and never have I ceased to feel remorse for it; but
God alone shall be my Judge, for I triumphed, and this was the last
evil thought of my life. In this thought, moreover, lay the whole of my
crime; the rest was the work of fate.

Filled with fear, I suddenly turned my back on her and, wringing
my hands in despair, hastened away by the path which had brought me
thither. I cared little where I went; I only knew that I had to tear
myself away from perilous temptations. It was a broiling day; the odour
of the woods seemed intoxicating; the mere sight of them was stirring
up the instincts of my old savage life; I had to flee or fall. With an
imperious gesture, Edmee ordered me to depart from her presence. The
idea that any danger could possibly threaten her except from myself
naturally did not come into my head or her own. I plunged into the
forest. I had not gone more than thirty paces when I heard the report
of a gun from the spot where I had left Edmee. I stopped, petrified with
horror; why, I know not; for in the middle of a battue the report of a
gun was by no means extraordinary; but my soul was so sorrowful that it
seemed ready to find fresh woe in everything. I was about to retrace my
steps and rejoin Edmee at the risk of offending her still more when I
thought I heard the moaning of a human being in the direction of Gazeau
Tower. I rushed forward, and then fell upon my knees, as if stunned by
emotion. It took me some minutes to recover; my brain seemed full
of doleful sights and sounds; I could no longer distinguish between
illusion and reality; though the sun was shining brightly I began to
grope my way among the trees. All of a sudden I found myself face to
face with the abbe; he was anxiously looking for Edmee. The chevalier
had driven to a certain spot to watch the field pass, and not seeing his
daughter, had been filled with apprehension. The abbe had plunged into
the forest at once, and, soon finding the tracks of our horses, had come
to see what had happened to us. He had heard the gun, but had thought
nothing of it. Seeing me pale and apparently dazed, with my hair
disarranged, and without either horse or gun (I had let mine fall on the
spot where I had half fainted, and had not thought of picking it up),
he was as terrified as myself; nor did he know any more than I for what
reason.

“Edmee!” he said to me, “where is Edmee?”

I made a rambling reply. He was so alarmed at seeing me in such a
state that he felt secretly convinced I had committed some crime, as he
subsequently confessed to me.

“Wretched boy!” he said, shaking me vigorously by the arm to bring me to
my senses. “Be calm; collect your thoughts, I implore you! . . .”

I did not understand a word, but I led him towards the fatal spot; and
there--a sight never to be forgotten--Edmee was lying on the ground
rigid and bathed in blood. Her mare was quietly grazing a few yards
away. Patience was standing by her side with his arms crossed on his
breast, his face livid, and his heart so full that he was unable to
answer a word to the abbe’s cries and sobs. For myself, I could not
understand what was taking place. I fancy that my brain, already
bewildered by my previous emotions, must have been completely paralyzed.
I sat down on the ground by Edmee’s side. She had been shot in the
breast in two places. I gazed on her lifeless eyes in a state of
absolute stupor.

“Take away that creature,” said Patience to the abbe, casting a look of
contempt on me. “His perverse nature is what it always was.”

“Edmee, Edmee!” cried the abbe, throwing himself upon the grass and
endeavouring to stanch the blood with his handkerchief.

“Dead, dead!” said Patience. “And there is the murderer! She said so as
she gave up her pure soul to God; and Patience will avenge her! It is
very hard; but it must be so! It is God’s will, since I alone was here
to learn the truth.”

“Horrible, horrible!” exclaimed the abbe.

I heard the sound of this last word, and with a smile I repeated it like
an echo.

Some huntsmen now appeared. Edmee was carried away. I believe that I
caught sight of her father walking without help. However, I should not
dare to affirm that this was not a mere extravagant vision (for I had no
definite consciousness of anything, and these awful moments have left
in my mind nothing but vague memories, as of a dream), had I not been
assured that the chevalier got out of the carriage without any help,
walked about, and acted with as much presence of mind as a young man.
On the following day he fell into a state of absolute dotage and
insensibility, and never rose from his arm-chair again.

But what happened to myself? I do not know. When I recovered my
reason, I found that I was in another part of the forest near a little
waterfall, to the murmur of which I was listening mechanically with a
sort of vague delight. Blaireau was asleep at my feet, while his master,
leaning against a tree, was watching me attentively. The setting sun
was sending shafts of ruddy gold between the slender stems of the young
ash-trees; the wild flowers seemed to be smiling at me; and birds were
warbling sweet melodies. It was one of the most beautiful days of the
year.

“What a gorgeous evening!” I said to Marcasse. “This spot is as
beautiful as an American forest. Well, old friend, what are you doing
there? You ought to have awakened me sooner. I have had such hideous
dreams.”

Marcasse came and knelt down beside me; two streams of tears were
running down his withered, sallow cheeks. On his face, usually so
impassive, there was an ineffable expression of pity and sorrow and
affection.

“Poor master!” he said, “delirium, head bad, that’s all. Great
misfortune! But fidelity not changed. Always with you; if need be, ready
to die with you.”

His tears and words filled me with sadness; but this was owing to an
instinctive sympathy enhanced by the weak state of my nerves, for I
did not remember a thing. I threw myself into his arms and wept like
himself; he pressed me to his bosom, as a father might his son. I was
fully conscious that some frightful misfortune had overtaken me, but
I was afraid to learn what it was, and nothing in the world would have
induced me to ask him.

He took me by the arm and led me through the forest. I let myself be
taken like a child. Then a fresh sense of weariness came over me, and he
was obliged to let me sit down again for half an hour. At last he lifted
me up and succeeded in leading me to Roche-Mauprat, where we arrived
very late. I do not know what happened to me during the night. Marcasse
told me subsequently that I had been very delirious. He took upon
himself to send to the nearest village for a barber, who bled me early
in the morning, and a few minutes later I recovered my reason.

But what a frightful service they seemed to have done me. Dead! Dead!
Dead! This was the only word I could utter. I did nothing but groan and
toss about on my bed. I wanted to get up and run to Sainte-Severe. My
poor sergeant would throw himself at my feet, or plant himself in front
of the door to prevent me. To keep me back, he would tell me various
things which I did not in the least understand. However, his manifest
solicitude for me and my own feeling of exhaustion made me yield, though
I could not explain his conduct. In one of these struggles my vein
opened again, and I returned to bed before Marcasse noticed it.
Gradually I sank into a deep swoon, and I was almost dead when, seeing
my blue lips and purple cheeks, he took it into his head to lift up the
bed-clothes, and found me lying in a pool of blood.

However, this was the most fortunate thing that could have happened to
me. For several days I remained in a state of prostration in which there
was but little difference between my waking and sleeping hours. Thanks
to this, I understood nothing, and therefore did not suffer.

One morning, having managed to make me take a little nourishment, and
noticing that with my strength my melancholy and anxiety were returning,
Marcasse announced, with a simple, genuine delight, that Edmee was not
dead, and that they did not despair of saving her. These words fell upon
me like a thunderbolt; for I was still under the impression that this
frightful adventure was a delusion of my delirium. I began to shout and
to brandish my arms in a terrible manner. Marcasse fell on his knees by
my bed and implored me to be calm, and a score of times he repeated the
following words, which to me were like the meaningless words one hears
in dreams:

“You did not do it on purpose; I know well enough. No, you did not do it
on purpose. It was an accident; a gun going off in your hand by chance.”

“Come, now, what do you mean?” I exclaimed impatiently. “What gun? What
accident? What have I to do with it?”

“Don’t you know, then, sir, how she was hit?”

I passed my hands over my brow as if to bring back to my mind the energy
of life, and as I had no clear recollection of the mysterious event
which had unhinged it, I thought that I was mad, and remained silent and
dismayed, fearful lest any word should escape to betray the loss of my
faculties.

At last, little by little, I collected my thoughts. I asked for some
wine, as I felt weak; and no sooner had I drunk a few drops than all the
scenes of the fatal day unrolled themselves before me as if by magic.
I even remembered the words that I had heard Patience utter immediately
after the event. It was as if they had been graven in that part of the
memory which preserves the sound of words, even when the other part
which treasures up their sense is asleep. For one more moment I was
uncertain; I wondered if my gun could have gone off in my hands just
as I was leaving Edmee. I distinctly remembered firing it at a pewit
an hour before, for Edmee had wanted to examine the bird’s plumage.
Further, when I heard the shot which had hit her, my gun was in my
hands, and I had not thrown it down until a few seconds later, so it
could not have been this weapon which had gone off on falling. Besides,
even granting a fatality which was incredible, I was much too far from
Edmee at that moment to have shot her. Finally, I had not a single
bullet on me throughout the day; and it was impossible for my gun to
have been loaded, unknown to myself, since I had not unslung it after
killing the pewit.

Quite convinced, therefore, that I was not the cause of the hideous
accident, it remained to me to find an explanation of this crushing
catastrophe. To me it was perfectly simple; some booby with a gun, I
thought, must have caught sight of Edmee’s horse through the branches
and mistaken it for a wild beast; and I did not dream of accusing any
one of a deliberate attempt at murder. I discovered, however, that I was
accused myself. I drew the truth from Marcasse. He informed me that the
chevalier and all the people who took part in the hunt had attributed
the misfortune to a pure accident, their opinion being that, to my great
sorrow, my gun had gone off when my horse threw me, for it was believed
that I had been thrown. This was practically the view they all took. In
the few words that Edmee had been able to utter she seemed to confirm
the supposition. Only one person accused me, and that was Patience; but
he had accused me before none but his two friends, Marcasse and the Abbe
Aubert, and then only after pledging them to secrecy.

“There is no need,” added Marcasse, “for me to tell you that the abbe
maintains an absolute silence, and refuses to believe that you are
guilty. As for myself, I swear to you that I shall never--”

“Stop! stop!” I said. “Do not tell me even that; it would imply
that some one in the world might actually believe it. But Edmee said
something extraordinary to Patience just as she was dying; for she is
dead; it is useless for you to try to deceive me. She is dead, and I
shall never see her again.”

“She is not dead!” cried Marcasse.

And his solemn oaths convinced me, for I knew that he would have tried
in vain to lie; his simple soul would have risen in revolt against
his charitable intentions. As for Edmee’s words, he frankly refused
to repeat them; from which I gathered that their testimony seemed
overwhelming. Thereupon I dragged myself out of bed, and stubbornly
resisted all Marcasse’s efforts to keep me back; I had the farmer’s
horse saddled and started off at a gallop. I staggered into the
drawing-room without meeting any one except Saint-Jean, who uttered
a cry of terror on seeing me, and rushed off without answering my
questions.

The drawing-room was empty. Edmee’s embroidery frame, buried under the
green cloth, which her hand, perchance, would never lift again, seemed
to me like a bier under its pall. My uncle’s big arm-chair was no
longer in the chimney-corner. My portrait, which I had had painted in
Philadelphia and had sent over during the American war, had been taken
down from the wall. These were signs of death and malediction.

I left this room with all haste and went upstairs with the courage of
innocence, but with despair in my soul. I waled straight to Edmee’s
room, knocked, and entered at once. Mademoiselle Leblanc was coming
towards the door; she gave a loud scream and ran away, hiding her face
in her hands as if she had seen a wild beast. Who, then, could have been
spreading hideous reports about me? Had the abbe been disloyal enough
to do so? I learnt later that Edmee, though generous and unshaken in her
lucid moments, had openly accused me in her delirium.

I approached her bed and, half delirious myself, forgetting that my
sudden appearance might be a deathblow to her, I pulled the curtains
aside with an eager hand and gazed on her. Never have I seen more
marvellous beauty. Her big dark eyes had grown half as large again;
they were shining with an extraordinary brilliancy, though without any
expression, like diamonds. Her drawn, colourless cheeks, and her lips,
as white as her cheeks, gave her the appearance of a beautiful marble
head. She looked at me fixedly, with as little emotion as if she had
been looking at a picture or a piece of furniture; then, turning her
face slightly towards the wall, she said, with a mysterious smile:

“This is the flower they call _Edmea sylvestris_.”

I fell upon my knees; I took her hand; I covered it with kisses; I
broke into sobs. But she gave no heed; her hand remained in mine icy and
still, like a piece of alabaster.




XXIII

The abbe came in and greeted me in a cold and sombre manner. Then he
made a sign to me, and drawing me away from the bed, said:

“You must be mad! Return at once; and if you are wise, you will remain
away. It is the only thing left for you to do.”

“And since when,” I cried, flying into a passion, “have you had the
right to drive me out of the bosom of my family?”

“Alas! you have no longer a family,” he answered, with an accent of
sorrow that somewhat disarmed me. “What were once father and daughter
are now naught but two phantoms, whose souls are already dead and whose
bodies soon will be. Show some respect for the last days of those who
loved you.”

“And how can I show my respect and grief by quitting them?” I replied,
quite crushed.

“On this point,” said the abbe, “I neither wish nor ought to say
anything; for you know that your presence here is an act of rashness and
a profanation. Go away. When they are no more (and the day cannot be far
distant), if you have any claims to this house, you may return, and
you will certainly not find me here to contest them or affirm them.
Meanwhile, as I have no knowledge of these claims, I believe I may take
upon myself to see that some respect is paid to the last hours of these
two holy people.”

“Wretched man!” I said, “I do not know what prevents me from tearing you
to pieces! What abominable impulse urges you to be everlastingly turning
the dagger in my breast? Are you afraid that I may survive this blow?
Cannot you see that three coffins will be taken out together from this
house? do you imagine that I have come here for aught but a farewell
look and a farewell blessing?”

“You might say a farewell pardon,” replied the abbe, in a bitter tone,
and with a gesture of merciless condemnation.

“What I say is that you are mad!” I cried, “and that if you were not a
priest, this hand of mine should crush the life out of you for daring to
speak to me in this way.”

“I have but little fear of you, sir,” he rejoined. “To take my life
would be doing me a great service; but I am sorry that your threats and
anger should lend weight to the charges under which you lie. If I
saw that you were moved to penitence, I would weep with you; but your
assurance fills me with loathing. Hitherto, I had seen in you nothing
worse than a raging lunatic; to-day I seem to see a scoundrel. Begone,
sir!”

I fell into an arm-chair, choking with rage and anguish. For a moment I
hoped that I was about to die. Edmee was dying by my side, and before me
was a judge so firmly convinced of my guilt that his usual gentle, timid
nature had become harsh and pitiless. The imminent loss of her I loved
was hurrying me into a longing for death. Yet the horrible charge
hanging over me began to rouse my energies. I did not believe that such
an accusation could stand for a single instant against the voice of
truth. I imagined that one word from me, one look, would be sufficient
to make it fall to the ground; but I felt so dazed, so deeply wounded,
that this means of defence was denied me. The more grievously the
disgrace of such a suspicion weighed upon my mind, the more clearly
I realized that it is almost impossible for a man to defend himself
successfully when his only weapon is the pride of slandered innocence.

I sat there overwhelmed, unable to utter a word. It seemed as if a
dome of lead were weighing on my skull. Suddenly the door opened and
Mademoiselle Leblanc approached me stiffly; in a tone full of hatred
she informed me that some one outside wished to speak to me. I went out
mechanically, and found Patience waiting with his arms folded, in his
most dignified attitude, and with an expression on his face which would
have compelled both respect and fear if I had been guilty.

“Monsieur de Mauprat,” he said, “I must request you to grant me a
private interview. Will you kindly follow me to my cottage?”

“Yes, I will,” I replied. “I am ready to endure any humiliation, if only
I can learn what is wanted of me and why you are all pleased to insult
the most unfortunate of men. Lead the way, Patience, and go quickly; I
am eager to return here.”

Patience walked in front of me with an impassive air. When we arrived
at his little dwelling, we found my poor sergeant, who had just arrived
likewise. Not finding any horse on which he could follow me, and not
wishing to quit me, he had come on foot, and so quickly that he was
bathed in perspiration. Nevertheless, the moment he saw us he sprang
up full of life from the bench on which he had thrown himself under the
bower of vine-branches, and came to meet us.

“Patience!” he cried, in a dramatic style which would have made me smile
had it been possible for me to display a glimmer of mirth at such a
moment. “Old fool! . . . Slanderer at your age? . . . Fie, sir! . . .
Ruined by good fortune . . . you are . . . yes.”

Patience, impassive as ever, shrugged his shoulders and said to his
friend:

“Marcasse, you do not know what you are saying. Go and rest awhile at
the bottom of the orchard. This matter does not concern you. I want to
speak to your master alone. I wish you to go,” he added, taking him by
the arm; and there was a touch of authority in his manner to which the
sergeant, in spite of his ticklish prided, yielded from instinct and
habit.

As soon as we were alone Patience proceeded to the point; he began by a
series of questions to which I resolved to submit, so that I might the
more quickly obtain some light on the state of affairs around me.

“Will you kindly inform me, monsieur,” he said, “what you purpose doing
now?”

“I purpose remaining with my family,” I answered, “as long as I have
a family; and when this family is no more, what I shall do concerns no
one.”

“But, sir,” replied Patience, “if you were told that you could not
remain under the same roof with them without causing the death of one or
the other, would you persist in staying?”

“If I were convinced that this was so,” I rejoined, “I would not appear
in their presence. I would remain at their door and await the last
day of their life, or the first day of their renewed health, and again
implore a love I have not yet ceased to deserve.”

“Ah, we have come to this!” said Patience, with a smile of contempt. “I
should not have believed it. However, I am very glad; it makes matters
clearer.”

“What do you mean?” I cried. “Speak, you wretch! Explain yourself!”

“You are the only wretch here,” he answered coldly, at the same time
sitting down on the one stool in the cottage, while I remained standing
before him.

I wanted to draw an explanation from him, at all costs. I restrained my
feelings; I even humbled myself so far as to say that I should be ready
to accept advice, if he would consent to tell me the words that Edmee
had uttered immediately after the event, and those which she had
repeated in her hours of delirium.

“That I will not,” replied Patience sternly; “you are not worthy to hear
any words from that mouth, and I shall certainly never repeat them to
you. Why do you want to know them? Do you hope to hide anything from men
hereafter? God saw you; for Him there are no secrets. Leave this place;
stay at Roche-Mauprat; keep quiet there; and when your uncle is dead and
your affairs are settled, leave this part of the country. If you take my
advice, you will leave it this very day. I do not want to put the law on
your track, unless your actions force me. But others besides myself,
if they are not certain of the truth, have at least a suspicion of
it. Before two days have passed a chance word said in public, the
indiscretion of some servant, may awaken the attention of justice, and
from that point to the scaffold, when a man is guilty, is but a single
step. I used not to hate you; I even had a liking for you; take this
advice, then, which you say you are ready to follow. Go away at once, or
remain in hiding and ready for flight. I do not desire your ruin; Edmee
would not desire it either--so--do you understand?”

“You must be insane to think that I could listen to such advice. I, hide
myself! or flee like a murderer! You can’t dream of that! Come on!
come on! I defy the whole of you! I know not what fury and hatred are
fretting you and uniting you all against me; I know not why you want to
keep me from seeing my uncle and cousin; but I despise your follies.
My place is here; I shall not quit it except by order of my cousin or
uncle; and this order, too, I must take from their own lips; I cannot
allow sentence to be brought me by any outsider. So, thanks for your
wisdom, Monsieur Patience; in this case my own will suffice. I am your
humble servant, sir.”

I was preparing to leave the cottage when he rushed in front of me, and
for a moment I saw that he was ready to use force to detain me. In spite
of his advanced age, in spite of my height and strength, he might still
have been a match, perhaps more than a match, for me in a struggle of
this kind. Short, bent, broad-shouldered, he was a Hercules.

He stopped, however, just as he was about to lay hands on me, and,
seized with one of those fits of deep tenderness to which he was subject
in his moments of greatest passion, he gazed at me with eyes of pity,
and said, in a gentle tone:

“My poor boy! you whom I loved as a son (for I looked upon you as
Edmee’s brother), do not hasten to your ruin. I beseech you in the
name of her whom you have murdered, and whom you still love--I can see
it--but whom you may never behold again. Believe me, but yesterday your
family was a proud vessel, whose helm was in your hands; to-day it is
a drifting wreck, without either sail or pilot--left to be handled
by cabinboys, as friend Marcasse says. Well, my poor mariner, do not
persist in drowning yourself; I am throwing you a rope; take it--a day
more, and it may be too late. Remember that if the law gets hold of you,
the man who is trying to save you to-day, to-morrow will be obliged to
appear against you and condemn you. Do not compel me to do a thing the
very thought of which brings tears to my eyes. Bernard, you have been
loved, my lad; even to-day you may live on the past.”

I burst into tears, and the sergeant, who returned at this moment, began
to weep also; he implored me to go back to Roche-Mauprat; but I soon
recovered and, thrusting them both away, said:

“I know that both of you are excellent men, and both most generous; you
must have some love for me too, since, though you believe me blackened
with a hideous crime, you can still think of saving my life. But have no
fears on my account, good friends; I am innocent of this crime, and my
one wish is that the matter may be fully investigated, so that I may be
acquitted--yes, this is inevitable, I owe it to my family to live until
my honour has been freed from stain. Then, if I am condemned to see my
cousin die, as I have no one in the world to love but her, I will blow
my brains out. Why, then, should I be downcast? I set little store by
my life. May God make the last hours of her whom I shall certainly not
survive painless and peaceful--that is all I ask of Him.”

Patience shook his head with a gloomy, dissatisfied expression. He was
so convinced of my crime that all my denials only served to alienate his
pity. Marcasse still loved me, though he thought I was guilty. I had no
one in the world to answer for my innocence, except myself.

“If you persist on returning to the chateau,” exclaimed Patience, “you
must swear before you leave that you will not enter your cousin’s room,
or your uncle’s, without the abbe’s permission.”

“What I swear is that I am innocent,” I replied, “and that I will
allow no man to saddle me with a crime. Back, both of you! Let me pass!
Patience, if you consider it your duty to denounce me, go and do so. All
that I ask is that I may not be condemned without a hearing; I prefer
the bar of justice to that of mere opinion.”

I rushed out of the cottage and returned to the chateau. However, not
wishing to make a scandal before the servants, and knowing quite well
that they could not hide Edmee’s real condition from me, I went and shut
myself up in the room I usually occupied.

But in the evening, just as I was leaving it to get news of the two
patients, Mademoiselle Leblanc again told me that some one wished to
speak with me outside. I noticed that her face betrayed a sense of joy
as well as fear. I concluded that they had come to arrest me, and I
suspected (rightly, as it transpired) that Mademoiselle Leblanc had
denounced me. I went to the window, and saw some of the mounted police
in the courtyard.

“Good,” I said; “let my destiny take its course.”

But, before quitting, perhaps forever, this house in which I was
leaving my soul, I wished to see Edmee again for the last time. I walked
straight to her room. Mademoiselle Leblanc tried to throw herself in
front of the door; I pushed her aside so roughly that she fell, and, I
believe, hurt herself slightly. She immediately filled the house with
her cries; and later, in the trial, made a great pother about what she
was pleased to call an attempt to murder her. I at once entered Edmee’s
room; there I found the abbe and the doctor. I listened in silence to
what the latter was saying. I learnt that the wounds in themselves were
not mortal, that they would not even be very serious, had not a violent
disturbance in the brain complicated the evil and made him fear tetanus.
This frightful word fell upon me like a death sentence. In America I had
seen many men die of this terrible malady, the result of wounds received
in the war. I approached the bed. The abbe was so alarmed that he did
not think of preventing me. I took Edmee’s hand, cold and lifeless, as
ever. I kissed it a last time, and, without saying a single word to the
others, went and gave myself up to the police.




XXIV

I was immediately thrown into prison at La Chatre. The public prosecutor
for the district of Issoudun took in hand this case of the attempted
murder of Mademoiselle de Mauprat, and obtained permission to have
a monitory published on the morrow. He went to the village of
Sainte-Severe, and then to the farms in the neighbourhood of the Curat
woods, where the event had happened, and took the depositions of more
than thirty witnesses. Then, eight days after I had been arrested, the
writ of arrest was issued. If my mind had been less distracted, or if
some one had interested himself in me, this breach of the law and
many others that occurred during the trial might have been adduced as
powerful arguments in my favour. They would at least have shown that the
proceedings were inspired by some secret hatred. In the whole course of
the affair an invisible hand directed everything with pitiless haste and
severity.

The first examination had produced but a single indictment against me;
this came from Mademoiselle Leblanc. The men who had taken part in the
hunt declared that they knew nothing, and had no reason to regard the
occurrence as a deliberate attempt at murder. Mademoiselle Leblanc,
however, who had an old grudge against me for certain jokes I had
ventured to make at her expense, and who, moreover, had been suborned,
as I learned afterward, declared that Edmee, on recovering from her
first swoon, at a time when she was quite calm and in full possession of
her reason, had confided to her, under a pledge of secrecy, that she had
been insulted, threatened, dragged from her horse, and finally shot by
me. This wicked old maid, putting together the various revelations
that Edmee had made in her delirium, had, cleverly enough, composed a
connected narrative, and added to it all the embellishments that hatred
could suggest. Distorting the incoherent words and vague impressions of
her mistress, she declared upon oath that Edmee had seen me point the
barrel of my carbine at her, with the words, “As I swore, you shall die
by my hand.”

Saint-Jean, who was examined the same day, declared that he knew nothing
beyond what Mademoiselle Leblanc had told him that evening, and his
deposition was very similar to hers. He was honest enough, but dull and
narrow-minded. From love of exactness, he omitted no trifling detail
which might be interpreted against me. He asserted that I had always
been subject to pains in the head, during which I lost my senses; that
several times previously, when my nerves were disordered, I had spoken
of blood and murder to some individual whom I always fancied I could
see; and, finally, that my temper was so violent that I was “capable of
throwing the first thing that came to hand at any one’s head, though
as a fact I had never, to his knowledge, committed any excess of this
kind.” Such are the depositions that frequently decide life and death in
criminal cases.

Patience could not be found on the day of this inquiry. The abbe
declared that his ideas on the occurrence were so vague that he would
undergo all the penalties inflicted on recalcitrant witnesses rather
than express his opinion before fuller investigations had been made.
He requested the public prosecutor to give him time, promising on his
honour that he would not resist the demands of justice, and representing
that at the end of a few days, by inquiring into certain things, he
would probably arrive at a conviction of some sort; in this event he
undertook to speak plainly, either for or against me. This delay was
granted.

Marcasse simply said that if I had inflicted the wounds on Mademoiselle
de Mauprat, about which he was beginning to feel very doubtful, I had at
least inflicted them unintentionally; on this he was prepared to stake
his honour and his life.

Such was the result of the first inquiry. It was resumed at various
times during the following days, and several false witnesses swore
that they had seen me shoot Mademoiselle de Mauprat, after vainly
endeavouring to make her yield to my wishes.

One of the most baneful instruments of ancient criminal procedure was
what was known as the monitory; this was a notice from the pulpit, given
out by the bishop and repeated by all vicars to their parishioners,
ordering them to make inquiries about the crime in question, and to
reveal all the facts which might come to their knowledge. This was
merely a modified form of the inquisitorial principle which reigned more
openly in other countries. In the majority of cases, the monitory, which
had, as a fact, been instituted in order to encourage informers in the
name of religion, was a marvel of ridiculous atrocity; it frequently set
forth the crime and all the imaginary circumstances the plaintiffs were
eager to prove; it was, in short, the publication of a ready-made case,
which gave the first knave that came a chance of earning some money
by making a lying deposition in favour of the highest bidder. The
inevitable effect of the monitory, when it was drawn up with a bias,
was to arouse public hatred against the accused. The devout especially,
receiving their opinions ready-made from the clergy, pursued the victim
without mercy. This is what happened in my own case; but here the clergy
of the province were playing a further secret part which almost decided
my fate.

The case was taken to the assizes at the court of Bourges, and
proceedings began in a very few days.

You can imagine the gloomy despair with which I was filled. Edmee’s
condition was growing more and more serious; her mind was completely
unhinged. I felt no anxiety as to the result of the trial; I never
imagined it was possible to convict me of a crime I had not committed;
but what were honour and life to me, if Edmee were never to regain the
power of recognising my innocence? I looked upon her as already dead,
and as having cursed me dying! So I was inflexibly resolved to kill
myself immediately after receiving my sentence, whatever it might be.
Until then I felt that it was my duty to live, and to do what might be
necessary for the triumph of truth; but I was plunged in such a state
of stupor that I did not even think of ascertaining what was to be
done. Had it not been for the cleverness and zeal of my counsel, and the
sublime devotion of Marcasse, my listlessness would have left me to the
most terrible fate.

Marcasse spent all his time in expeditions on my behalf. In the evening
he would come and throw himself on a bundle of straw at the foot of my
trunkle bed, and, after giving me news of Edmee and the chevalier,
whom he went to see every day, he would tell me the results of his
proceedings. I used to grasp his hand affectionately; but I was
generally so absorbed by the news he had just given me of Edmee, that I
never heard anything further.

This prison of La Chatre had formerly been the stronghold of the
Elevains of Lombaud, the seigneurs of the province. Nothing was left of
it but a formidable square tower at the top of a ravine where the Indre
forms a narrow, winding valley, rich with the most beautiful vegetation.
The weather was magnificent. My room, situated at the top of the tower,
received the rays of the rising sun, which cast the long, thin shadows
of a triple row of poplars as far as the eye could see. Never did
landscape more smiling, fresh, and pastoral offer itself to the eyes
of a prisoner. But how could I find pleasure in it? Words of death and
contumely came to me in every breeze that blew through the wall-flowers
growing in the crannies. Every rustic sound, every tune on the pipe that
rose to my room, seemed to contain an insult or to proclaim profound
contempt for my sorrow. There was nothing, even to the bleating of
the flocks, which did not appear to me an expression of neglect or
indifference.

For some time Marcasse had had one fixed idea, namely, that Edmee had
been shot by John Mauprat. It was possible; but as there was no evidence
to support the conjecture, I at once ordered him not to make known his
suspicions. It was not for me to clear myself at the expense of others.
Although John Mauprat was capable of anything, it was possible that he
had never thought of committing this crime; and as I had not heard him
spoken of for more than six weeks, it seemed to me that it would have
been cowardly to accuse him. I clung to the belief that one of the men
in the battue had fired at Edmee by mistake, and that a feeling of fear
and shame prevented him from confessing his misadventure. Marcasse had
the courage to go and see all those who had taken part in the hunt, and,
with such eloquence as Heaven had granted him, implored them not to fear
the penalty for unintentional murder, and not to allow an innocent man
to be accused in their stead. All these efforts were fruitless; from
none of the huntsmen did my poor friend obtain a reply which left him
any nearer a solution of the mystery that surrounded us.

On being transferred to Bourges, I was thrown into the castle which had
belonged to the old dukes of Berry; this was henceforth to be my prison.
It was a great grief to me to be separated from my faithful sergeant. He
would have been allowed to follow me, but he had a presentiment that he
would soon be arrested at the suggestion of my enemies (for he persisted
in believing that I was the victim of a plot), and thus be unable
to serve me any more. He wished, therefore, to lose no time, and to
continue his investigations as long as they “should not have seized his
person.”

Two days after my removal to Bourges, Marcasse produced a document
which had been drawn up at his instance by two notaries of La Chatre. It
contained the depositions of ten witnesses to the effect that for some
days before the attempted assassination, a mendicant friar had been
prowling about Varenne; that he had appeared in different places very
close together; and, notably, that he had slept at Notre-Dame de Poligny
the night before the event. Marcasse maintained that this monk was John
Mauprat. Two women declared that they had thought they recognised him
either as John or Walter Mauprat, who closely resembled him. But Walter
had been found drowned the day after the capture of the keep; and the
whole town of La Chatre, on the day when Edmee was shot, had seen the
Trappist engaged with the Carmelite prior from morning till night in
conducting the procession and services for the pilgrimage of Vaudevant.
These depositions, therefore, so far from being favourable to me,
produced a very bad effect, and threw odium on my defence. The Trappist
conclusively proved his alibi, and the prior of the Carmelites helped
him to spread a report that I was a worthless villain. This was a time
of triumph for John Mauprat; he proclaimed aloud that he had come to
deliver himself up to his natural judges to suffer punishment for his
crimes in the past; but no one could think of prosecuting such a holy
man. The fanaticism that he inspired in our eminently devout province
was such that no magistrate would have dared to brave public opinion by
proceeding against him. In his own depositions, Marcasse gave an
account of the mysterious and inexplicable appearance of the Trappist
at Roche-Mauprat, the steps he had taken to obtain an interview with M.
Hubert and his daughter, his insolence in entering and terrifying them
in their drawing-room, and the efforts the Carmelite prior had made to
obtain considerable sums of money from me on behalf of this individual.
All these depositions were treated as fairy tales, for Marcasse admitted
that he had not seen the Trappist in any of the places mentioned, and
neither the chevalier nor his daughter was able to give evidence. It
is true that my answers to the various questions put to me confirmed
Marcasse’s statements; but as I declared in all sincerity that for
some two months the Trappist had given me no cause for uneasiness or
displeasure, and as I refused to attribute the murder to him, it seemed
for some days as if he would be forever reinstated in public opinion. My
lack of animosity against him did not, however, diminish that which my
judges showed against me. They made use of the arbitrary powers which
magistrates had in bygone days, especially in remote parts of the
provinces, and they paralyzed all my lawyer’s efforts by a fierce haste.
Several legal personages, whose names I will not menton, indulged,
even publicly, in a strain of invective against me which ought to have
excluded them from any court dealing with questions of human dignity and
morality. They intrigued to induce me to confess, and almost went so far
as to promise me a favourable verdict if I at least acknowledged that I
had wounded Mademoiselle de Mauprat accidently. The scorn with which
I met these overtures alienated them altogether. A stranger to all
intrigue, at a time when justice and truth could not triumph except by
intrigue, I was a victim of two redoubtable enemies, the Church and the
Law; the former I had offended in the person of the Carmelite prior; and
the latter hated me because, of the suitors whom Edmee had repulsed, the
most spiteful was a man closely related to the chief magistrate.

Nevertheless, a few honest men to whom I was almost unknown, took an
interest in my case on account of the efforts of others to make my name
odious. One of them, a Monsieur E----, who was not without influence,
for he was the brother of the sheriff of the province and acquainted
with all the deputies, rendered me a service by the excellent
suggestions he made for throwing light on this complicated affair.

Patience, convinced as he was of my guilt, might have served my enemies
without wishing to do so; but he would not. He had resumed his roaming
life in the woods, and, though he did not hide, could never be found.
Marcasse was very uneasy about his intentions and could not understand
his conduct at all. The police were furious to find that an old man was
making a fool of them, and that without going beyond a radius of a few
leagues. I fancy that the old fellow, with his habits and constitution,
could have lived for years in Varenne without falling into their hands,
and, moreover, without feeling that longing to surrender which a sense
of _ennui_ and the horror of solitude so frequently arouse, even in
great criminals.




XXV

The day of the public trial came. I went to face it quite calmly; but
the sight of the crowd filled me with a profound melancholy. No support,
no sympathy for me there! It seemed to me that on such an occasion
I might at least have looked for that show of respect to which the
unfortunate and friendless are entitled. Yet, on all the faces around
I saw nothing but a brutal and insolent curiosity. Girls of the lower
classes talked loudly of my looks and my youth. A large number of women
belonging to the nobility or moneyed classes displayed their brilliant
dresses in the galleries, as if they had come to some _fete_. A great
many monks showed their shaven crowns in the middle of the populace,
which they were inciting against me; from their crowded ranks I could
frequently catch the words “brigand,” “ungodly,” and “wild beast.” The
men of fashion in the district were lolling on the seats of honour, and
discussing my passion in the language of the gutter. I saw and heard
everything with that tranquility which springs from a profound disgust
of life; even as a traveller who has come to the end of his journey, may
look with indifference and weariness on the eager bustle of those who
are setting off for a more distant goal.

The trial began with that emphatic solemnity which at all times has
been associated with the exercise of judicial power. My examination was
short, in spite of the innumerable questions that were asked me about
my whole life. My answers singularly disappointed the expectations
of public curiosity, and shortened the trial considerably. I confined
myself to three principal replies, the substance of which I never
changed. Firstly, to all questions concerning my childhood and
education, I replied that I had not come into the defendant’s dock to
accuse others. Secondly, to those bearing on Edmee, the nature of my
feeling for her, and my relations with her, I replied that Mademoiselle
de Mauprat’s worth and reputation could not permit even the simplest
question as to the nature of her relations with any man whatever; and
that, as to my feelings for her, I was accountable for them to no one.
Thirdly, to those which were designed to make me confess my pretended
crime, I replied that I was not even the unwilling author of the
accident. In brief answers I gave some details of the events immediately
preceding it; but, feeling that I owed it to Edmee as much as to myself
to be silent about the tumultuous impulses that had stirred me, I
explained the scene which had resulted in my quitting her, as being due
to a fall from my horse; and that I had been found some distance from
her body was, I said, because I had deemed it advisable to run after my
horse, so that I might again escort her. Unfortunately all this was not
very clear, and, naturally, could not be. My horse had gone off in the
direction opposite to that which I said; and the bewildered state
in which I had been found before I knew of the accident, was not
sufficiently explained by a fall from my horse. They questioned me
especially about the gallop I had had with my cousin through the wood,
instead of following the hunt as we had intended; they would not believe
that we had gone astray, guided altogether by chance. It was impossible,
they said, to look upon chance as a reasonable being, armed with a gun,
waiting for Edmee at Gazeau Tower at an appointed time, in order to
shoot her the moment I turned my back for five minutes. They pretended
that I must have taken her to this out-of-the-way spot either by craft
or force to outrage her; and that I had tried to kill her either from
rage at not succeeding, or from fear of being discovered and punished
for my crime.

Then all the witnesses for and against me were heard. It is true
that among the former Marcasse was the only one who could really be
considered as a witness for the defence. The rest merely affirmed that
a “monk bearing a resemblance to the Mauprats” had been roaming about
Varenne at the period in question, and that he had even appeared to hide
himself on the evening of the event. Since then he had not been seen.
These depositions, which I had not solicited, and which I declared had
not been taken at my request, caused me considerable astonishment; for
among the witnesses who made them I saw some of the most honest folk in
the country. However, they had no weight except in the eyes of Monsieur
E----, the magistrate, who was really interested in discovering the
truth. He interposed, and asked me how it was that M. Jean de Mauprat
had not been summoned to confront these witnesses, seeing that he
had taken the trouble to put in his affidavit to prove an alibi. This
objection was received with a murmur of indignation. There were not
a few people, however, who by no means looked upon John Mauprat as a
saint; but they took no interest in myself, and had merely come to the
trial as to a play.

The enthusiasm of the bigots reached a climax when the Trappist suddenly
stood up in the crowd. Throwing back his cowl in a theatrical manner,
he boldly approached the bar, declaring that he was a miserable sinner
worthy of all scorn, but on this occasion, when it was the duty of every
one to strive for truth, he considered it incumbent on him to set
an example of simple candour by voluntarily offering himself for any
examination which might shed light on the judges’ minds. These
words were greeted with applause. The Trappist was admitted to the
witness-box, and confronted with the witnesses, who all declared,
without any hesitation, that the monk they had seen wore the same habit
as this man, and that there was a family likeness, a sort of distant
resemblance between the two; but that it was not the same person--on
this point they had not the least doubt.

The result of this incident was a fresh triumph for the Trappist. No one
seemed to notice that, as the witnesses had displayed so much candour,
it was difficult to believe that they had not really seen another
Trappist. At this moment I remembered that, at the time of the abbe’s
first interview with John Mauprat at the spring at Fougeres, the
latter had let fall a few words about a friar of the same order who was
travelling with him, and had passed the night at the Goulets farm. I
thought it advisable to mention this fact to my counsel. He discussed it
in a low voice with the abbe, who was sitting among the witnesses. The
latter remembered the circumstance quite clearly, but was unable to add
any further details.

When it came to the abbe’s turn to give evidence he looked at me with
an expression of agony; his eyes filled with tears, and he answered the
formal questions with difficulty, and in an almost inaudible voice. He
made a great effort to master himself, and finally he gave his evidence
in these words:

“I was driving in the woods when M. le Chevalier Hubert de Mauprat
requested me to alight, and see what had become of his daughter, Edmee,
who had been missing from the field long enough to cause him uneasiness.
I ran for some distance, and when I was about thirty yards from Gazeau
Tower I found M. Bernard de Mauprat in a state of great agitation. I
had just heard a gun fired. I noticed that he was no longer carrying his
carbine; he had thrown it down (discharged, as has been proved), a few
yards away. We both hastened to Mademoiselle de Mauprat, whom we found
lying on the ground with two bullets in her. Another man had reached her
before us and was standing near her at this moment. He alone can make
known the words he heard from her lips. She was unconscious when I saw
her.”

“But you heard the exact words from this individual,” said the
president; “for rumour has it that there is a close friendship between
yourself and the learned peasant known as Patience.”

The abbe hesitated, and asked if the laws of conscience were not in
this case at variance with the laws of the land; and if the judges had
a right to ask a man to reveal a secret intrusted to his honour, and to
make him break his word.

“You have taken an oath here in the name of Christ to tell the truth,
the whole truth,” was the reply. “It is for you to judge whether this
oath is not more solemn than any you may have made previously.”

“But, if I had received this secret under the seal of the confessional,”
 said the abbe, “you certainly would not urge me to reveal it.”

“I believe, Monsieur l’Abbe,” said the president, “that it is some time
since you confessed any one.”

At this unbecoming remark I noticed an expression of mirth on John
Mauprat’s face--a fiendish mirth, which brought back to me the man as I
knew him of old, convulsed with laughter at the sight of suffering and
tears.

The annoyance which the abbe felt at this personal attack gave him the
courage which might otherwise have been wanting. He remained for a few
moments with downcast eyes. They thought that he was humiliated; but,
as soon as he raised his head, they saw his eyes flashing with the
malicious obstinacy of the priest.

“All things considered,” he said, in the most gentle tone, “I think that
my conscience bids me keep this secret; I shall keep it.”

“Aubert,” said the King’s advocate, angrily, “you are apparently unaware
of the penalties which the law inflicts on witnesses who behave as you
are doing.”

“I am aware of them,” replied the abbe, in a still milder tone.

“Doubtless, then, you do not intend to defy them?”

“I will undergo them if necessary,” rejoined the abbe, with an
imperceptible smile of pride, and such a dignified bearing that all the
women were touched.

Women are excellent judges of things that are delicately beautiful.

“Very good,” replied the public prosecutor. “Do you intend to persist in
this course of silence?”

“Perhaps,” replied the abbe.

“Will you tell us whether, during the days that followed this attempt to
murder Mademoiselle de Mauprat, you were in a position to hear the words
she uttered, either during her delirium or during her lucid intervals?”

“I can give you no information on that point,” answered the abbe. “It
would be against my inclinations, and, moreover, in my eyes, an outrage
on propriety, to repeat words which, in the case of delirium, could
prove absolutely nothing, and, if uttered in a lucid moment, could only
have been the outpouring of a genuinely filial affection.”

“Very good,” said the King’s advocate, rising. “We shall call upon the
Court to deliberate on your refusal of evidence, taking this incident in
connection with the main question.”

“And I,” said the president, “in virtue of my discretionary power, do
order that Aubert be meanwhile arrested and taken to prison.”

The abbe allowed himself to be led away with unaffected calmness. The
spectators were filled with respect, and a profound silence reigned
in court, in spite of the bitter efforts of the monks and cures, who
continued to revile the heretic in an undertone.

When the various witnesses had been heard (and I must say that those
who had been suborned played their part very feebly in public), to crown
all, Mademoiselle Leblanc appeared. I was surprised to find the old maid
so bitter against me and able to turn her hatred to such account. In
truth, the weapons she could bring against me were only too powerful.
In virtue of the right which domestics claim to listen at doors and
overhear family secrets, this skilled misinterpreter and prolific liar
had learnt and shaped to her own purposes most of the facts in my
life which could be utilized for my ruin. She related how, seven years
before, I had arrived at the chateau of Sainte-Severe with Mademoiselle
de Mauprat, whom I had rescued from the roughness and wickedness of my
uncles.

“And let that be said,” she added, turning toward John Mauprat with a
polite bow, “without any reference to the holy man in this court, who
was once a great sinner, and is now a great saint. But at what a price,”
 she continued, facing the judges again, “had this miserable bandit saved
my dear mistress! He had dishonoured her, gentlemen; and, throughout the
days that followed, the poor young lady had abandoned herself to grief
and shame on account of the violence which had been done her, for which
nothing could bring consolation. Too proud to breath her misfortune to
a single soul, and too honest to deceive any man, she broke off her
engagement with M. de la Marche, whom she loved passionately, and who
returned her passion. She refused every offer of marriage that was
made her, and all from a sense of honour, for in reality she hated M.
Bernard. At first she wanted to kill herself; indeed, she had one of her
father’s little hunting-knives sharpened and (M. Marcasse can tell you
the same, if he chooses to remember) she would certainly have killed
herself, if I had not thrown this knife into the well belonging to the
house. She had to think, too, of defending herself against the night
attacks of her persecutor; and, as long as she had this knife, she
always used to put it under her pillow; every night she would bolt the
door of her room; and frequently I have seen her rush back, pale and
ready to faint, quite out of breath, like a person who has just been
pursued and had a great fright. When this gentleman began to receive
some education, and learn good manners, mademoiselle, seeing that she
could never have any other husband, since he was always talking of
killing any man who dared to present himself, hoped he would get rid of
his fierceness, and was most kind and good to him. She even nursed him
during his illness; not that she liked and esteemed him as much as M.
Marcasse was pleased to say in his version; but she was always afraid
that in his delirium he might reveal, either to the servants or her
father, the secret of the injury he had done her. This her modesty and
pride made her most anxious to conceal, as all the ladies present will
readily understand. When the family went to Paris for the winter of ‘77,
M. Bernard became jealous and tyrannical and threatened so frequently
to kill M. de la Marche that mademoiselle was obliged to send the latter
away. After that she had some violent scenes with Bernard, and declared
that she did not and never would love him. In his rage and grief--for
it cannot be denied that he was enamoured of her in his tigerish
fashion--he went off to America, and during the six years he spent there
his letters seemed to show that he had much improved. By the time he
returned, mademoiselle had made up her mind to be an old maid, and had
become quite calm again. And M. Bernard, too, seemed to have grown into
a fairly good young gentleman. However, through seeing her every day
and everlastingly leaning over the back of her arm-chair, or winding
her skeins of wool and whispering to her while her father was asleep, he
fell so deeply in love again that he lost his head. I do not wish to be
too hard on him, poor creature! and I fancy his right place is in the
asylum rather than on the scaffold. He used to shout and groan all night
long; and the letters he wrote her were so stupid that she used to smile
as she read them and then put them in her pocket without answering them.
Here is one of these letters that I found upon her when I undressed her
after the horrible deed; a bullet has gone through it, and it is
stained with blood, but enough may still be read to show that monsieur
frequently intended to kill mademoiselle.”

So saying, she put down on the table a sheet of paper half burnt
and half covered with blood, which sent a shudder through the
spectators--genuine with some of them, mere affectation with many
others.

Before this letter was read, she finished her deposition, and ended it
with some assertions which perplexed me considerably; for I could no
longer distinguish the boundary between truth and perfidy.

“Ever since her accident,” she said, “mademoiselle has been hovering
between life and death. She will certainly never recover, whatever the
doctors may declare. I venture to say that these gentlemen, who only see
the patient at certain hours, do not understand her illness as well as
I, who have never left her for a single night. They pretend that her
wounds are going on well and that her head is deranged; whereas I say
that her wounds are going on badly, and that her head is better than
they say. Mademoiselle very rarely talks irrationally, and if by chance
she does, it is in the presence of these gentlemen, who confuse and
frighten her. She then makes such efforts not to appear mad that she
actually becomes so; but as soon as they leave her alone with me or
Saint-Jean or Monsieur l’Abbe, who could quite well have told you how
things are, if he had wished, she becomes calm again, and sweet and
sensible as usual. She says that she could almost die of pain, although
to the doctors she pretends that she is scarcely suffering at all.
And then she speaks of her murderer with the generosity that becomes a
Christian; a hundred times a day she will say:

“‘May God pardon him in the next life as I pardon him in this! After
all, a man must be very fond of a woman to kill her! I was wrong not to
marry him; perhaps he would have made me happy. I drove him to despair
and he has avenged himself on me. Dear Leblanc, take care never to
betray the secret I have told you. A single indiscreet word might send
him to the scaffold, and that would be the death of my father.’

“The poor young lady is far from imagining that things have come to this
pass; that I have been summoned by the law and my religion to make known
what I would rather conceal; and that, instead of going out to get an
apparatus for her shower-baths, I have come here to confess the truth.
The only thing that consoles me is that it will be easy to hide all this
from M. le Chevalier, who has no more sense now than a babe just born.
For myself, I have done my duty; may God be my judge!”

After speaking thus with perfect self-possession and great volubility,
Mademoiselle Leblanc sat down again amid a murmur of approbation, and
they proceeded to read the letter which had been found on Edmee.

It was, indeed, the one I had written to her only a few days before the
fatal day. They handed it to me; I could not help pressing my lips to
the stains of Edmee’s blood. Then, after glancing at the writing, I
returned the letter, and declared quite calmly that it was written by
me.

The reading of this letter was my _coup de grace_. Fate, who seems
ingenious in injuring her victims, had obtained (and perhaps some famous
hand had contributed to the mutilation) that the passages expressing my
obedience and respect should be destroyed. Certain poetic touches which
might have furnished an explanation of, and an excuse for, my wild
ramblings, were illegible. What showed plain to every eye, and carried
conviction to every mind, were the lines that remained intact, the lines
that bore witness to the violence of my passion and the vehemence of my
frenzy. They were such phrases as these: “Sometimes I feel inclined to
rise in the middle of the night and go and kill you! I should have done
this a hundred times, if I had been sure that I should love you no
more after your death. Be considerate; for there are two men in me, and
sometimes the brigand of old lords it over the new man, etc.” A smile of
triumph played about my enemies’ mouths. My supporters were demoralized,
and even my poor sergeant looked at me in despair. The public had
already condemned me.

This incident afforded the King’s advocate a fine chance of thundering
forth a pompous address, in which he described me as an incurable
blackguard, as an accursed branch of an accursed stock, as an example of
the fatality of evil instincts. Then, after exerting himself to hold
me up as an object of horror and fear, he endeavoured, in order to give
himself an air of impartiality and generosity, to arouse the compassion
of the judges in my favour; he proceeded to show that I was not
responsible for my actions; that my mind had been perverted in early
childhood by foul sights and vile principles, and was not sound, nor
ever could have been, whatever the origin and growth of my passions. At
last, after going through a course of philosophy and rhetoric, to the
great delight of the audience, he demanded that I should be condemned to
privation of civil rights and imprisonment for life.

Though my counsel was a man of spirit and intelligence, the letter
had so taken him by surprise, the people in court were so unfavourably
disposed towards me, and the judges, as they listened to him, so
frequently showed signs of incredulity and impatience (an unseemly habit
which appears to be the heritage of the magisterial benches of this
country), that his defence was tame. All that he seemed justified in
demanding with any vigour was a further inquiry. He complained that all
the formalities had not been fulfilled; that sufficient light had not
been thrown on certain points in the case; that it would be showing
too much haste to give a verdict when several circumstances were still
wrapped in mystery. He demanded that the doctors should be called to
express an opinion as to the possibility of taking Mademoiselle de
Mauprat’s evidence. He pointed out that the most important, in fact the
only important, testimony was that of Patience, and that Patience might
appear any day and prove me innocent. Finally, he demanded that
they should order a search to be made for the mendicant friar whose
resemblance to the Mauprats had not yet been explained, and had been
sworn to by trustworthy witnesses. In his opinion it was essential
to discover what had become of Antony Mauprat, and to call upon the
Trappist for information on this point. He complained bitterly that they
had deprived him of all means of defence by refusing any delay; and he
had the courage to assert that some evil passions must be responsible
for such blind haste as had marked the conduct of this trial. On this
the president called him to order. Then the King’s advocate replied
triumphantly that all formalities had been fulfilled; that the court was
sufficiently enlightened; that a search for the mendicant friar would
be a piece of folly and in bad taste, since John Mauprat had proved his
last brother’s death, which had taken place several years before. The
court retired to deliberate; at the end of half an hour they came back
with a verdict condemning me to death.




XXVI

Although the haste with which the trial had been conducted and the
severity of the sentence were iniquitous, and filled those who were
most bitter against me with amazement, I received the blow with supreme
indifference; I no longer felt an interest in anything on earth. I
commended my soul and the vindication of my memory to God. I said to
myself that if Edmee died I should find her again in a better world;
that if she survived me and recovered her reason, she would one day
succeed in discovering the truth, and that then I should live in
her heart as a dear and tender memory. Irritable as I am, and always
inclined to violence in the case of anything that is an obstacle or an
offence to me, I am astonished at the philosophical resignation and the
proud calm I have shown on the momentous occasions of life, and above
all on this one.

It was two o’clock in the morning. The case had lasted for fourteen
hours. A silence as of death reigned over the court, which was as full
and as attentive as at the beginning, so fond are mortals of anything in
the nature of a show. That offered by the criminal court at this moment
was somewhat dismal. Those men in red robes, as pale and stern and
implacable as the Council of Ten at Venice; those ghosts of women decked
with flowers, who, by the dim light of the tapers, looked like mere
reflections of life hovering in the galleries above the priests of
death; the muskets of the guard glittering in the gloom in the back of
the court; the heart-broken attitude of my poor sergeant, who had fallen
at my feet; the silent but vast delight of the Trappist, still standing
unwearied near the bar; the mournful note of some convent bell in the
neighbourhood beginning to ring for matins amid the silence of the
assembly--was not all this enough to touch the nerves of the wives of
the farmers-general and to send a thrill through the brawny breasts of
the tanners in the body of the court?

Suddenly, just as the court was about to disperse, a figure like that of
the traditional peasant of the Danube--squat, rugged, barefooted, with
a long beard, dishevelled hair, a broad, grave brow, and a stern,
commanding glance--rose in the midst of the flickering reflections by
which the hall was half lighted, and standing erect before the bar, said
in a deep, striking voice:

“I, Jean le Houx, known as Patience, oppose this judgment as iniquitous
in substance and illegal in form. I demand that it be revised, so that
I may give my evidence, which is necessary, may be of sovereign
importance, and should have been waited for.”

“If you had anything to say,” cried the King’s advocate, in a passion,
“why did you not present yourself when you were summoned. You are
imposing on the court by pretending that you have important evidence to
give.”

“And you,” answered Patience, more slowly and in an even deeper tone
than before, “you are imposing on the public by pretending that I have
not. You know well enough that I must have.”

“Remember where you are, witness, and to whom you are speaking.”

“I know too well, and I shall not say too much. I hereby declare that I
have some important things to say, and that I should have said them at
the right time, if you had not done violence to the time. I wish to say
them, and I shall; and, believe me, it is better that I should make them
known while it is still possible to revise these proceedings. It is even
better for the judges than the prisoner; for the one comes to life again
in honour, as soon as the others die in infamy.”

“Witness,” said the irritated magistrate, “the virulence and
impertinence of your language will be prejudicial rather than
advantageous to the prisoner.”

“And who says that I am favourable to the prisoner?” said Patience in a
voice of thunder. “What do you know about me? What if it pleases me
to change an illegal and worthless verdict into one which is legal and
irrevocable?”

“But how can you reconcile this desire to see the laws respected,” said
the magistrate, genuinely moved by Patience’s powerful personality,
“with your own breach of them in not appearing when summoned by the
public prosecutor?”

“I did not wish to appear.”

“Severe penalties may be inflicted on those whose wishes are not in
harmony with the laws of the land.”

“Possibly.”

“Have you come here to-day with the intention of submitting to them?”

“I have come to see that you respect them.”

“I warn you that, if you do not change your tone, I shall have you taken
off to prison.”

“And I warn you that, if you love justice and serve God, you will listen
to me and suspend the execution of this sentence. It is not for him who
brings truth to humble himself before those who should be seeking it.
But you who are listening to me now, you men of the people, whom I will
not accuse the great of wishing to dupe, you whose voice is called ‘the
voice of God,’ side with me; embrace the cause of truth, that truth
which is in danger of being stifled under false outward shows, or else
is about to triumph by unfair means. Go down on your knees, you men
of the people, my brothers, my children; pray, implore, require that
justice be done and anger repressed. It is your duty, it is your right,
and to your own interest; for it is you who are insulted and threatened
when laws are violated.”

Patience spoke with so much warmth, and his sincerity was so strikingly
manifest, that a thrill of sympathy ran through the whole audience. At
that time, philosophy was too fashionable with the young men of quality
for these not to be among the first to respond to an appeal, though
addressed to others than themselves. They rose with chivalrous
enthusiasm and turned round to the people, who, carried away by their
noble example, rose likewise. There was a wild uproar, and one and all,
conscious of their dignity and power, cast away personal prejudices in
order to combine for their common rights. Thus, a noble impetuosity and
a true word are sometimes sufficient to bring back the masses who have
long been led astray by sophism.

A respite was granted, and I was led back to my prison amid the applause
of the people. Marcasse followed me. Patience disappeared without giving
me a chance to thank him.

The revision of the sentence could not be made without an order from the
high court. For my own part, before the verdict was given I had resolved
to make no appeal to this court of cassation of the old jurisprudence.
But Patience’s bearing and words had had as much effect on my mind as on
the minds of the spectators. The spirit of resistance and the sense
of human dignity, dulled in me and paralyzed, as it were, by grief,
suddenly awoke again, and in this hour I realized that man is not made
for that selfish concentration of despair which is known as resignation
or stoicism. No man can cease to have a regard for his own honour
without at the same time ceasing to feel the respect due to the
principle of honour. If it is grand to sacrifice personal glory and life
to the mysterious decrees of conscience, it is cowardly to abandon both
to the fury of an unjust persecution. I felt that I had risen in my own
estimation, and I passed the rest of this momentous night in devising
means of vindicating myself, with as much persistence as I had
previously displayed in abandoning myself to fate. With this feeling of
energy I could feel hope springing up anew. Edmee, perhaps, was neither
mad nor mortally wounded. She might acquit me; she might recover.

“Who knows?” I said to myself. “Perhaps she has already done me justice.
Perhaps it was she who sent Patience to my rescue. Undoubtedly I shall
best please her by taking courage again, and not letting myself be
crushed by a set of knaves.”

But how was I to obtain this order from the high court? It needed a
special mandate from the King; who would procure this? Who would cut
short those odious delays which the law can introduce at will into the
very cases that it has previously hurried on with blind precipitation?
Who would prevent my enemies from injuring me and paralyzing all my
efforts? In a word, who would fight for me? The abbe alone could have
taken up my cause; but he was already in prison on my account. His
generous behaviour in the trial had proved that he was still my friend,
but his zeal was now fettered. And what could Marcasse do, hampered
by his humble birth and enigmatical language? Evening came, and I fell
asleep in the hope that help would be sent from on high; for I had
prayed to God with my whole soul. A few hours of sleep refreshed me; I
was aroused by the noise of bolts being drawn at the other side of
my door. O God of goodness! what was my delight on seeing Arthur, my
brother in arms, my other self, the man from whom I had had no secret
for six long years! I wept like a child on receiving this mark of love
from Providence. Arthur did not believe me guilty! Scientific matters
connected with the library at Philadelphia had taken him to Paris, where
he had heard of this sad affair in which I was implicated. He had broken
a lance with all who attacked me, and had not lost a moment in coming to
offer help or consolation.

In a transport of joy I poured out my soul to him, and then explained
how he could assist me. He wanted to take the coach for Paris that very
evening; but I implored him to go to Sainte-Severe first of all to get
news of Edmee. Four mortal days had passed since I had received any;
and, moreover, Marcasse had never given me such exact details as I could
have wished.

“Ease your mind,” said Arthur. “I will undertake to bring you the truth.
I am a pretty good surgeon; and I have a practised eye. I shall be
able to give you some idea of what you have to hope or fear. From
Sainte-Severe I shall go straight to Paris.”

Two days later I received a long letter from him giving full details
about Edmee.

Her condition was extraordinary. She did not speak, nor did she appear
to be in pain as long as nothing happened to excite her nerves; but on
the first word which stirred up recollections of her troubles she would
be seized with convulsions. Her moral isolation formed the greatest
obstacle to recovery. Physically she wanted for nothing; she had two
good doctors and a most devoted nurse. Mademoiselle Leblanc likewise was
very zealous in her attentions, though this dangerous woman often gave
her pain by untimely remarks and indiscreet questions. Furthermore,
Arthur assured me that, if ever Edmee had thought me guilty and had
expressed an opinion on this point, it must have been in some previous
phase of her illness; for, during the last fortnight at least, she
had been in a state of complete torpor. She would frequently doze, but
without quite falling asleep; she could take liquid food and jellies,
nor did she ever complain. When her doctors questioned her about her
sufferings she answered by careless signs and always negatively; and she
would never give any indication that she remembered the affections which
had filled her life. Her love for her father, however, that feeling
which had always been so deep and powerful in her, was not extinct; she
would often shed copious tears; but at such a time she seemed to be deaf
to all sounds; in vain would they try to make her understand that her
father was not dead, as she appeared to believe. With a gesture of
entreaty she would beg them to stop, not the noise (for that did not
seem to strike her ear), but the bustle that was going on around her;
then, hiding her face in her hands, lying back in her arm-chair and
bringing her knees up almost to her breast, she would apparently give
way to inconsolable despair. This silent grief, which could no longer
control itself and no longer wished to be controlled; this powerful
will, which had once been able to quell the most violent storms, and now
going adrift on a dead sea and in an unruffled calm--this, said Arthur,
was the most painful spectacle he had ever beheld. Edmee seemed to wish
to have done with life. Mademoiselle Leblanc, in order to test her and
arouse her, had brutally taken upon herself to announce that her father
was dead; she had replied by a sign that she knew. A few hours later
the doctors had tried to make her understand that he was alive; she had
replied by another sign that she did not believe them. They had wheeled
the chevalier’s arm-chair into her room; they had brought father and
daughter face to face and the two had not recognised each other. Only,
after a few moments, Edmee, taking her father for a ghost, had uttered
piercing cries, and had been seized with convulsions that had opened one
of her wounds again, and made the doctors tremble for her life. Since
then, they had taken care to keep the two apart, and never to breathe a
word about the chevalier in Edmee’s presence. She had taken Arthur for
one of the doctors of the district and had received him with the same
sweetness and the same indifference as the others. He had not dared
to speak to her about me; but he extorted me not to despair. There was
nothing in Edmee’s condition that time and rest could not triumph over;
there was but little fever left; none of her vital organs were really
affected; her wounds were almost healed; and it did not seem as if her
brain were in such an excited condition that it would be permanently
deranged. The weak state of her mind, and the prostration of all the
other organs could not, according to Arthur, long withstand the vitality
of youth and the recuperative power of an admirable constitution.
Finally, he advised me to think of myself; I might help towards her
recovery, and I might again find happiness in her affection and esteem.

In a fortnight Arthur returned from Paris with an order from the King
for the revision of my sentence. Fresh witnesses were heard. Patience
did not appear; but I received a note from him containing these words
in a shapeless hand, “You are not guilty, so don’t despair.” The doctors
declared that Mademoiselle de Mauprat might be examined without danger,
but that her answers would have no meaning. She was now in better
health. She had recognised her father, and at present would never leave
him; but she could understand nothing that was not connected with him.
She seemed to derive great pleasure from tending him like a child, and,
on his side, the chevalier would now and then recognise his beloved
daughter; but his vital powers were visibly decaying. They questioned
him in one of his lucid moments. He replied that his daughter had,
indeed, fallen from her horse while hunting, and that she had torn her
breast on the stump of a tree, but that not a soul had fired at her,
even by mistake, and that only a madman could possibly believe her
cousin capable of such a crime. This was all the information they could
draw from him. When they asked him what he thought of his nephew’s
absence, he answered that his nephew was still in the house, and that
he saw him every day. Was it that, in his devotion to the good name of
a family--alas! so compromised--he thought to defeat the aims of justice
by childish lies? This is a point I was never able to ascertain. As for
Edmee, it was impossible to examine her. At the first question that was
asked her, she shrugged her shoulders and made a sign that she did not
wish to be bothered. As the public prosecutor insisted and became
more explicit, she stared at him and seemed to be making an effort to
understand. He pronounced my name, she gave a loud cry and fainted. He
had to abandon all thoughts of taking her evidence. However, Arthur did
not despair. On the contrary, the account of this scene made him think
that Edmee’s mental faculties might be about to take a favourable turn.
He immediately returned to Sainte-Severe, where he remained several days
without writing to me, which caused me great anxiety.

When the abbe was questioned again, he persisted in his calm, laconic
refusal to give evidence.

My judges, seeing that the information promised by Patience was not
forthcoming, hurried on the revision of the trial, and, by another
exhibition of haste, gave another proof of their animosity. The
appointed day arrived. I was devoured by anxiety. Arthur had written me
to keep up my courage, in as laconic a style as Patience. My counsel
had been unable to obtain any fresh evidence in my favour. I could see
clearly that he was beginning to believe me guilty. All he hoped for was
to obtain a further delay.




XXVII

There were even more people present than at the first trial. The guard
were forced back to the doors of the court, and the crowd occupied every
available space, even to the windows of the mansion of Jacques Coeur,
the town-hall of the present day. I was much agitated this time,
though I had strength and pride enough not to let it be seen. I was now
interested in the success of my case, and, as it seemed as if my hopes
were not to be realized, I experienced an indescribable feeling of
uneasiness, a sort of suppressed rage, a bitter hatred of these men who
would not open their eyes to my innocence, and even of God who seemed to
have deserted me.

In this state of agitation I had to make such violent efforts to appear
calm that I scarcely noticed what was happening around me. I recovered
sufficient presence of mind when my fresh examination took place to
answer in the same terms as at the first trial. Then a black veil seemed
to fall over my head, an iron ring gripped my brow; the sockets of my
eyes went icily cold; I could see nothing but myself, hear nothing but
vague, unintelligible sounds. I do not know what actually took place; I
do not know if any one announced the apparition which suddenly appeared
before me. I only remember that a door opened behind the judges, and
that Arthur came forward leading a veiled woman, that he took off her
veil after making her sit down in a big arm-chair which the ushers
eagerly wheeled toward her, and that a cry of admiration rang through
the hall when Edmee’s pale, sublime beauty was revealed.

At this moment I forgot the crowd, and the judges, and my cause, and the
whole universe. I believe that no human power could have withstood my
wild rush. I dashed like a thunderbolt into the middle of the inclosure
and, falling at Edmee’s feet, I showered kisses on her knees. I have
been told that this act won over the public, and that nearly all the
ladies burst into tears. The young dandies did not venture to laugh; the
judges were affected; and for a moment truth was completely triumphant.

Edmee looked at me for some time. Her face was as expressionless as the
face of death. It did not seem as if she could ever recognise me. The
spectators were waiting in profound silence for her to show some sign of
hatred or affection for me. All at once she burst into tears, threw her
arms around my neck, and then lost consciousness. Arthur had her carried
out immediately; he had some trouble in making me return to my place. I
could not remember where I was or the issues that were at stake; I clung
to Edmee’s dress, and only wanted to follow her. Arthur addressed the
court and requested that the doctors who had examined Edmee in the
morning might again pronounce upon the state of her health. He likewise
demanded that she should be recalled to give evidence, and to be
confronted with me as soon as she recovered from the attack.

“This attack is not serious,” he said. “Mademoiselle de Mauprat has had
several of the same kind during the last few days and on her way here.
After each her mental faculties have taken a more and more favourable
turn.”

“Go and attend to the invalid,” said the president. “She shall be
recalled in two hours, if you think she will have recovered from her
swoon by then. Meanwhile the court will hear the witness on whose demand
the first sentence was not carried out.”

Arthur withdrew and Patience was introduced. He was dressed quite
neatly; but, after saying a few words, he declared that it would be
impossible to continue unless they allowed him to take off his coat.
This borrowed finery so embarrassed him and seemed so heavy that he
was perspiring profusely. No sooner did the president make a sign of
consent, accompanied by a smile of scorn, than he threw to the ground
this badge of civilization. Then, after carefully pulling down his
shirt-sleeves over his sinewy arms, he spoke almost as follows:

“I will speak the truth, the whole truth. I take the oath for the second
time; for I have to speak of things that seem contradictory, things that
I cannot explain to myself. I swear before God and man that I will say
what I know, and as I know it, without being influenced for or against
any one.”

He lifted his big hand and turned round towards the people with a simple
confidence, as if to say, “You can all see that I am taking an oath,
and you know that I am to be trusted.” This confidence of his was not
ill-founded. Since the incident in the first trial the public mind had
been much occupied about this extraordinary man, who had spoken before
the court with so much daring, and harangued the people in presence
of the judges. His conduct had filled all the democrats and
_Philadelphians_ with great curiosity and sympathy. The works of
Beaumarchais were very fashionable among the upper classes, and this
will explain how it was that Patience, though opposed to all the
authorities in the province, yet found himself supported and applauded
by every man who prided himself on his intelligence. They all thought
they saw in him Figaro under a new form. The fame of his private virtues
had spread; for you remember that during my stay in America, Patience
had made himself known among the people of Varenne and had exchanged his
sorcerer’s reputation for that of a public benefactor. They had given
him the title of the _great judge_, because he was always ready to
intervene in disputes, and would always settle to the satisfaction of
both sides with admirable good-nature and tact.

This time he spoke in a high, penetrating voice. It was a rich voice
of wide compass. His gestures were quiet or animated, according to the
circumstances, but always dignified and impressive; the expression on
his short, Socratic face was never anything but fine. He had all the
qualities of an orator; but there was no vanity in his display of them.
He spoke in the plain, concise style that he had been obliged to acquire
in his recent intercourse with men, in discussions about their practical
interests.

“When Mademoiselle de Mauprat was shot,” he said, “I was not more than a
dozen paces from her; but the brushwood at that spot is so thick that I
could not see more than two paces in front of me. They had persuaded me
to take part in the hunt; but it gave me but little pleasure. Finding
myself near Gazeau Tower, where I lived for some twenty years, I felt an
inclination to see my old cell again, and I was bearing down upon it at
a great pace when I heard a shot. That did not frighten me in the least;
it seemed but natural that there should be some gun fired during a
battue. But when I got through the thicket, that is to day, some two
minutes later, I found Edmee--excuse me, I generally call her by this
name; I am, so to speak, a sort of foster-father to her--I found Edmee
on her knees upon the ground, wounded as you have been told, and still
holding the bridle of her horse, which was rearing. She did not know
whether she was seriously or slightly wounded, but she had her other
hand on her breast, and she was saying:

“‘Bernard, this is hideous! I should never have thought that you would
kill me. Bernard, where are you? Come and see me die. This will kill
father!’

“As she said this she let go the horse’s bridle and fell to the ground.
I rushed towards her.

“‘Ah, you saw it, Patience?’ she said. ‘Do not speak about it; do not
tell my father . . .’

“She threw out her arms, and her body became rigid. I thought that she
was dead. She spoke no more until night, after they had extracted the
bullets from her breast.”

“Did you then see Bernard de Mauprat?”

“I saw him on the spot where the deed was done, just as Edmee lost
consciousness and seemed to be giving up her soul; he seemed to be out
of his mind. I thought that he was overwhelmed with remorse. I spoke to
him sternly, and treated him as a murderer. He made no reply, but sat
down on the ground by his cousin’s side. He remained there in a dazed
condition, even a long time after they had taken her away. No one
thought of accusing him. The people thought that he had had a fall,
because they saw his horse trotting by the side of the pond; they
believed that his carbine had gone off as he fell. The Abbe Aubert
was the only one who heard me accuse M. Bernard of having murdered his
cousin. During the days that followed, Edmee spoke occasionally, but
it was not always in my presence; besides, at this time she was nearly
always delirious. I maintain that she told nobody (and least of all
Mademoiselle Leblanc) what had passed between herself and M. de Mauprat
before the gun was fired. Nor did she confide this to me any more than
others. On the rare occasions when she was in possession of her senses
she would say in answer to our questions, that Bernard had certainly not
done it on purpose, and several times during the first three days
she even asked to see him. However, when she was delirious she would
sometimes cry, ‘Bernard! Bernard! You have committed a great crime. You
have killed my father!’

“That was her idea; she used really to think that her father was dead;
and she thought so for a long time. Very little, therefore, of what she
said is to be taken seriously. The words that Mademoiselle Leblanc
has put into her mouth are false. After three days she ceased to talk
intelligibly, and at the end of a week she ceased to speak altogether.
When she recovered her reason, about a week ago, she sent away
Mademoiselle Leblanc, which would clearly show that she had some
ground for disliking her maid. That is what I have to say against M. de
Mauprat. It rested entirely with myself to keep silent; but having other
things to say yet, I wished to make known the whole truth.”

Patience paused awhile; the public and the judges themselves, who were
beginning to take an interest in me and lose the bitterness of their
prejudices, were apparently thunderstruck at hearing evidence so
different from what they expected.

Patience continued as follows:

“For several weeks I remained convinced of Bernard’s guilt. But I was
pondering over the matter the while; I frequently said to myself that
a man as good and clever as Bernard, a man for whom Edmee felt so much
esteem, and whom M. le Chevalier loved like a son, a man, in short, so
deeply imbued with the spirit of justice and truth, could not between
one day and the next turn into a scoundrel. Then the idea came into my
head that, after all, it might have been some other Mauprat who fired
the shot. I do not speak of the one who has become a Trappist,” he
added, looking among the audience for Jean de Mauprat, who, however
was not there; “I speak of the man whose death has never been proved,
although the court thought fit to overlook this, and to accept M. Jean
de Mauprat’s word.”

“Witness,” said the president, “I must remind you that you are not here
to serve as counsel for the prisoner, or to criticise the decisions of
this court. You must confine yourself to a statement of facts, and not
express your opinion on the question at issue.”

“Very well,” replied Patience. “I must, however, explain why I did not
wish to appear at the first trial, seeing that the only evidence I
had was against M. Bernard, and that I could not trust that evidence
myself.”

“You are not asked to explain this at present. Please keep to your
evidence.”

“One moment. I have my honour to defend; I have to explain my own
conduct, if you please.”

“You are not the prisoner; you are not here to plead your own cause. If
the court thinks right to prosecute you for contempt you can see to your
own defence; but there is no question of that now.”

“I beg your pardon. The question is for me to let the court see whether
I am an honest man or a false witness. It would seem that this has
something to do with the case; the prisoner’s life depends on it; the
court cannot consider that a matter of indifference.”

“Proceed,” said the King’s advocate, “and try to remember the respect
you owe to the court.”

“I have no wish to offend the court,” replied Patience. “I would merely
observe that a man may refuse to submit to the orders of the court from
conscientious motives which the court can legally condemn, but which
each judge, personally, can understand and excuse. I say, then, that I
could not persuade myself of Bernard de Mauprat’s guilt; my ears alone
knew of it; this was not enough for me. Pardon me, gentlemen, I, too, am
a judge. Make inquiries about me; in my village they call me ‘the great
judge.’ When my fellow-villagers ask me to decide some tavern dispute or
the boundary of some field, I do not so much listen to their opinions
as my own. In judging a man one must take account of more than a single
little act. Many previous ones will help to show the truth or falsity
of the last that is imputed to him. Thus, being unable to believe that
Bernard was a murderer, and having heard more than a dozen people, whom
I consider incapable of giving false evidence, testify to the fact that
a monk ‘bearing a resemblance to the Mauprats’ had been prowling about
the country, and having myself seen this monk’s back and habit as he
was passing through Pouligny on the morning of the event, I wished to
discover if he was in Varenne; and I learnt that he was still there;
that is to say, after leaving it, he had returned about the time of the
trial last month. And, what is more, I learnt that he was acquainted
with John Mauprat. Who can this monk be? I asked myself; why does the
very sight of him frighten all the people in the country? What is he
doing in Varenne? If he belongs to the Carmelite convent, why does he
not wear their habit? If he is of the same order as John, why is he
not staying with him at the Carmelites? If he is collecting money, why,
after making a collection in one place, does he not move on to another,
instead of returning and bothering people who have given him money only
the day before? If he is a Trappist and does not want to stay with the
Carmelites like the other, why does he not go back to his own convent?
What is this wandering monk? And how does John Mauprat, who has told
several people that he does not know him, know him so well that they
lunch together from time to time in a tavern at Crevant? I made up my
mind, then, to give evidence, though it might, in a measure, do harm
to M. Bernard, so as to be able to say what I am now saying, even if it
should be of no use. But as you never allow witnesses sufficient time
to try to verify what they have reason to believe, I started off
immediately for my woods, where I live like the foxes, with a
determination not to quit them until I had discovered what this monk was
doing in the country. So I put myself on his track and I have discovered
who he is; he is the murderer of Edmee de Mauprat; his name is Antony
Mauprat.”

This revelation caused a great stir on the bench and among the public.
Every one looked around for John Mauprat, whose face was nowhere to be
seen.

“What proof have you of this?” said the president.

“I am about to tell you,” replied Patience. “Having learnt from
the landlady at Crevant, to whom I have occasionally been of some
assistance, that the two Trappists used to lunch at her tavern from time
to time, as I have said, I went and took up my abode about half a league
from here, in a hermitage known as Le Trou aux Fades, situated in the
middle of the woods and open to the first comer, furniture and all. It
is a cave in the rock, containing a seat in the shape of a big stone and
nothing else. I lived there for a couple of days on roots and bits of
bread that they occasionally brought me from the tavern. It is against
my principles to live in a tavern. On the third day the landlady’s
little boy came and informed me that the two monks were about to sit
down to a meal. I hastened back, and hid myself in a cellar which
opens into the garden. The door of this cellar is quite close to the
apple-tree under which these gentlemen were taking luncheon in the open
air. John was sober; the other was eating like a Carmelite and drinking
like a Franciscan. I could hear and see everything at my ease.

“‘There must be an end of this,’ Antony was saying--I easily recognised
the man when I saw him drink and heard him swear--‘I am tired of playing
this game for you. Hide me away with the Carmelites or I shall make a
row.’

“‘And what row can you make that will not bring you to the gallows, you
clumsy fool!’ answered John. ‘It is very certain that you will not set
foot inside the monastery. I don’t want to find myself mixed up in a
criminal trial; for they would discover what you are in an hour or two.’

“‘And why, I should like to know? You make them all believe that you
are a saint!’

“‘Because I know how to behave like a saint; whereas you--you behave
like a fool. Why, you can’t stop swearing for an hour, and you would be
breaking all the mugs after dinner!’

“‘I say, Nepomucene,’ rejoined the other, ‘do you fancy that you would
get off scot-free if I were caught and tried?’

“‘Why not?’ answered the Trappist. ‘I had no hand in your folly, nor
did I advise anything of this kind.’

“‘Ha! ha! my fine apostle!’ cried Antony, throwing himself back in his
chair in a fit of laughter. ‘You are glad enough about it, now that it
is done. You were always a coward; and had it not been for me you would
never have thought of anything better than getting yourself made a
Trappist, to ape devotion and afterward get absolution for the past,
so as to have a right to draw a little money from the “Headbreakers”
 of Sainte-Severe. By Jove! a mighty fine ambition, to give up the ghost
under a monk’s cowl after leading a pretty poor life and only tasting
half its sweets, let alone hiding like a mole! Come, now; when they have
hung my pretty Bernard, and the lovely Edmonde is dead, and when the
old neck-breaker has given back his big bones to the earth; when we have
inherited all that pretty fortune yonder; you will own that we have done
a capital stroke of business--three at a blow! It would cost me rather
too much to play the saint, seeing that convent ways are not quite my
ways, and that I don’t know how to wear the habit; so I shall throw
the cowl to the winds, and content myself with building a chapel at
Roche-Mauprat and taking the sacrament four times a year.’

“‘Everything you have done in this matter is stupid and infamous.’

“‘Bless my soul! Don’t talk of infamy, my sweet brother, or I shall
make you swallow this bottle whole.’

“‘I say that it is a piece of folly, and if it succeeds you ought to
burn a fine candle to the Virgin. If it does not succeed, I wash my
hands of the whole business, do you hear? After I had been in hiding in
the secret passage in the keep, and had heard Bernard telling his
valet after supper that he was going out of his mind on account of the
beautiful Edmee, I happened to throw out a suggestion that there might
be a chance here of doing a good stroke of business; and like a fool you
took the matter seriously, and, without consulting me or waiting for a
favourable moment, you went and did a deed that should have been thought
over and properly planned.’

“‘A favourable moment, chicken-heart that you are! How the deuce was
I to get one? “Opportunity makes the thief.” I find myself surprised
by the hunt in the middle of the forest; I go and hide in that cursed
Gazeau Tower; I see my turtle-doves coming; I overhear a conversation
that might make one die of laughing, and see Bernard blubbering and the
girl playing the haughty beauty; Bernard goes off like an idiot without
showing himself a man; I find on me--God knows how--a rascally pistol
already loaded. Bang! . . .’

“‘Hold your tongue, you wild brute!’ said the other, quite frightened.
‘Do you think a tavern is the proper place to talk of these things?
Keep that tongue quiet, you wretched creature, or I will never see you
again.’

“‘And yet you will have to see me, sweet brother mine, when I go and
ring the bell at the gate of the Carmelite monastery.’

“‘If you come I will denounce you.’

“‘You will not denounce me, for I know too much about you.’

“‘I am not afraid. I have given proofs of my repentance; I have
expiated my sins.’

“‘Hypocrite!’

“‘Come, now, hold your tongue, you madman!’ said the other. ‘I must
leave you. There is some money.’

“‘That all?’

“‘What do you expect from a monk? Do you imagine that I am rich?’

“‘Your Carmelites are; and you can do what you like with them.’

“‘I might give you more, but I would rather not. As soon as you got a
couple of louis you would be off for a debauch, and make enough row to
betray yourself.’

“‘And if you want me to quit this part of the country for some time,
what do you suppose I am to travel with?’

“‘Three times already I have given you enough to take you away, haven’t
I? And each time you have come back, after drinking it all in the
first place of ill-fame on the frontier of the province! Your impudence
sickens me, after the evidence given against you, when the police are
on the watch, when Bernard is appealing for a fresh trial. You may be
caught at any moment!’

“‘That is for you to see to, brother. You can lead the Carmelites by
the nose; and the Carmelites can lead the bishop, through some little
peccadillo, I suppose, done together on the quiet in the convent after
supper . . .’”

Here the president interrupted Patience.

“Witness,” he said, “I call you to order. You are outraging a prelate’s
virtue by daring to retail such a conversation.”

“By no means,” replied Patience. “I am merely reporting a drunkard’s and
a murderer’s invectives against the prelate. They do not concern me in
the least; and every one here knows what value to put upon them; but,
if you wish, I will say no more on this point. The discussion lasted
for some time longer. The real Trappist wanted to make the sham Trappist
leave the country, and the latter persisted in remaining, declaring
that, if he were not on the spot, his brother would have him arrested
immediately after Bernard’s head had been cut off, so that he might have
the whole inheritance to himself. John, driven to extremities, seriously
threatened to denounce him and hand him over to justice.

“‘Enough!’ replied Antony. ‘You will take good care not to do that, I
know; for, if Bernard is acquitted, good-bye to the inheritance!’

“Then they separated. The real Trappist went away looking very
anxious; the other fell asleep, with his elbows on the table. I left
my hiding-place to take steps for his arrest. It was just then that the
police, who had been on my track for some time to force me to come and
give evidence, collared me. In vain did I point to the monk as Edmee’s
murderer; they would not believe me, and said they had no warrant
against him. I wanted to arouse the village, but they prevented me from
speaking. They brought me here, from station to station, as if I had
been a deserter, and for the last week I have been in the cells and no
one has deigned to heed my protests. They would not even let me see M.
Bernard’s lawyer, or inform him that I was in prison; it was only just
now that the jailer came, and told me that I must put on my coat and
appear in court. I do not know whether all this is according to the
law; but one thing is certain, namely, that the murderer might have been
arrested and has not been; nor will he be, unless you secure the
person of John Mauprat to prevent him from warning, I do not say his
accomplice, but his _protege_. I state on oath that, from all I have
heard, John Mauprat is above any suspicion of complicity. As to the act
of allowing an innocent man to be handed over to the rigour of the law,
and of endeavouring to save a guilty man by going so far as to give
false evidence, and produce false documents to prove his death . . .”

Patience, noticing that the president was again about to interrupt him,
hastened to end his testimony by saying:

“As to that, gentlemen, it is for you, not for me, to judge him.”




XXVIII

After this important evidence the trial was suspended for a few minutes.
When the judges returned Edmee was brought back into the court. Pale and
weak, scarcely able to drag herself to the arm-chair which was reserved
for her, she nevertheless displayed considerable mental vigour and
presence of mind.

“Do you think you can answer the questions which will be put to you
without unduly exciting yourself?” asked the president.

“I hope so, sir,” she replied. “It is true that I have recently been
seriously ill, and that it is only within the last few days that I have
recovered my memory; but I believe I have completely recovered it, and
my mind feels quite clear.”

“Your name?”

“Solange-Edmonde de Mauprat; _Edmea sylvestris_,” she added in an
undertone.

I shuddered. As she said these unseasonable words her eyes had assumed
a strange expression. I feared that her mind was going to wander still
further. My counsel was also alarmed and looked at me inquiringly. No
one but myself had understood these two words which Edmee had been in
the habit of frequently repeating during the first and last days of
her illness. Happily this was the last sign of any disturbance in
her faculties. She shook her beautiful head, as if to drive out
any troublesome ideas; and, the president having asked her for an
explanation of these unintelligible words, she replied with sweetness
and dignity:

“It is nothing, sir. Please continue my examination.”

“Your age, mademoiselle?”

“Twenty-four.”

“Are you related to the prisoner?”

“He is my second cousin, and my father’s grand-nephew.”

“Do you swear to speak the truth, the whole truth?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Raise your hand.”

Edmee turned towards Arthur with a sad smile. He took off her glove, and
helped to raise her arm, which hung nerveless and powerless by her side.
I felt big tears rolling down my cheeks.

With delicacy and simplicity Edmee related how she and I had lost our
way in the woods; how I, under the impression that her horse had bolted,
had unseated her in my eager anxiety to stop the animal; how a slight
altercation had ensued, after which, with a little feminine temper,
foolish enough, she had wished to mount her mare again without help; how
she had even spoken unkindly to me, not meaning a word of what she said,
for she loved me like a brother; how, deeply hurt by her harshness, I
had moved away a few yards to obey her; and how, just as she was about
to follow me, grieved herself at our childish quarrel, she had felt a
violent shock in her breast, and had fallen almost without hearing any
report. It was impossible for her to say in which direction she was
looking, or from which side the shot had come.

“That is all that happened,” she added. “Of all people I am least
able to explain this occurrence. In my soul and conscience I can only
attribute it to the carelessness of one of the hunting party, who is
afraid to confess. Laws are so severe. And it is so difficult to prove
the truth.”

“So, mademoiselle, you do not think that your cousin was the author of
this attempt?”

“No, sir, certainly not! I am no longer delirious, and I should not have
let myself be brought before you if I had felt that my mind was at all
weak.”

“Apparently, then, you consider that a state of mental aberration was
responsible for the revelations you made to Patience, to Mademoiselle
Leblanc, your companion, and also, perhaps, to Abbe Aubert.”

“I made no revelations,” she replied emphatically, “either to the worthy
Patience, the venerable abbe, or my servant Leblanc. If the meaningless
words we utter in a state of delirium are to be called ‘revelations,’
all the people who frighten us in our dreams would have to be condemned
to death. How could I have revealed facts of which I never had any
knowledge?”

“But at the time you received the wound, and fell from your horse, you
said: ‘Bernard, Bernard! I should never have thought that you would kill
me!’”

“I do not remember having said so; and, even if I did, I cannot conceive
that any one would attach much importance to the impressions of a
person who had suddenly been struck to the ground, and whose mind was
annihilated, as it were. All that I know is that Bernard de Mauprat
would lay down his life for my father or myself; which does not make it
very probable that he wanted to murder me. Great God! what would be his
object?”

In order to embarrass Edmee, the president now utilized all the
arguments which could be drawn from Mademoiselle Leblanc’s evidence. As
a fact, they were calculated to cause her not a little confusion.
Edmee, who was at first somewhat astonished to find that the law was in
possession of so many details which she believed were unknown to others,
regained her courage and pride, however, when they suggested, in those
brutally chaste terms which are used by the law in such a case, that she
had been a victim of my violence at Roche-Mauprat. Her spirit thoroughly
roused, she proceeded to defend my character and her own honour, and
declared that, considering how I had been brought up, I had behaved
much more honourably than might have been expected. But she still had
to explain all her life from this point onward, the breaking off of her
engagement with M. de la Marche, her frequent quarrels with myself, my
sudden departure for America, her refusal of all offers of marriage.

“All these questions are abominable,” she said, rising suddenly, her
physical strength having returned with the exercise of her mental
powers. “You ask me to give an account of my inmost feelings; you would
sound the mysteries of my soul; you put my modesty on the rack; you
would take to yourself rights that belong only to God. I declare to you
that, if my own life were now at stake and not another’s, you should not
extract a word more from me. However, to save the life of the meanest of
men I would overcome my repugnance; much more, therefore, will I do for
him who is now at the bar. Know then--since you force me to a confession
which is painful to the pride and reserve of my sex--that everything
which to you seems inexplicable in my conduct, everything which you
attribute to Bernard’s persecutions and my own resentment, to his
threats and my terror, finds its justification in one word: I love him!”

On uttering this word, the red blood in her cheeks, and in the ringing
tone of the proudest and most passionate soul that ever existed, Edmee
sat down again and buried her face in her hands. At this moment I was so
transported that I could not help crying out:

“Let them take me to the scaffold now; I am king of all the earth!”

“To the scaffold! You!” said Edmee, rising again. “Let them rather take
me. Is it your fault, poor boy, if for seven years I have hidden from
you the secret of my affections; if I did not wish you to know it until
you were the first of men in wisdom and intelligence as you are already
the first in greatness of heart? You are paying dearly for my ambition,
since it has been interpreted as scorn and hatred. You have good reason
to hate me, since my pride has brought you to the felon’s dock. But I
will wash away your shame by a signal reparation; though they send you
to the scaffold, you shall go there with the title of my husband.”

“Your generosity is carrying you too far, Edmee de Mauprat,” said the
president. “It would seem that, in order to save your relative, you are
accusing yourself of coquetry and unkindness; for, how otherwise do
you explain the fact that you exasperated this young man’s passion by
refusing him for seven years?”

“Perhaps, sir,” replied Edmee archly, “the court is not competent to
judge this matter. Many women think it no great crime to show a little
coquetry with the man they love. Perhaps we have a right to this when
we have sacrificed all other men to him. After all, it is a very natural
and very innocent ambition to make the man of one’s choice feel that
one is a soul of some price, that one is worth wooing, and worth a long
effort. True, if this coquetry resulted in the condemnation of one’s
lover to death, one would speedily correct one’s self of it. But,
naturally, gentlemen, you would not think of atoning for my cruelty by
offering the poor young man such a consolation as this.”

After saying these words in an animated, ironical tone, Edmee burst
into tears. This nervous sensibility which brought to the front all the
qualities of her soul and mind, tenderness, courage, delicacy, pride,
modesty, gave her face at the same time an expression so varied, so
winning in all its moods, that the grave, sombre assembly of judges let
fall the brazen cuirass of impassive integrity and the leaden cope of
hypocritical virtue. If Edmee had not triumphantly defended me by her
confession, she had at least roused the greatest interest in my favour.
A man who is loved by a beautiful woman carries with him a talisman that
makes him invulnerable; all feel that his life is of greater value than
other lives.

Edmee still had to submit to many questions; she set in their proper
light the facts which had been misrepresented by Mademoiselle Leblanc.
True, she spared me considerably; but with admirable skill she managed
to elude certain questions, and so escaped the necessity of either lying
or condemning me. She generously took upon herself the blame for all
my offences, and pretended that, if we had had various quarrels, it
was because she herself took a secret pleasure in them; because they
revealed the depth of my love; that she had let me go to America to put
my virtue to the proof, thinking that the campaign would not last more
than a year, as was then supposed; that afterwards she had considered me
in honour bound to submit to the indefinite prolongation, but that
she had suffered more than myself from my absence; finally, she quite
remembered the letter which had been found upon her, and, taking it up,
she gave the mutilated passages with astonishing accuracy, and at the
same time called the clerk to follow as she deciphered the words which
were half obliterated.

“This letter was so far from being a threatening letter,” she said, “and
the impression it left on me was so far from filling me with fear or
aversion, that it was found on my heart, where I had been carrying it
for a week, though I had not even let Bernard know that I had received
it.”

“But you have not yet explained,” said the president, “how it was that
seven years ago, when your cousin first came to live in your house,
you armed yourself with a knife which you used to put under your pillow
every night, after having it sharpened as if to defend yourself in case
of need.”

“In my family,” she answered with a blush, “we have a somewhat romantic
temperament and a very proud spirit. It is true that I frequently
thought of killing myself, because I felt an unconquerable affection
for my cousin springing up in me. Believing myself bound by indissoluble
ties to M. de la Marche. I would have died rather than break my word, or
marry any other than Bernard. Subsequently M. de la Marche freed me from
my promise with much delicacy and loyalty, and I no longer thought of
dying.”

Edmee now withdrew, followed by all eyes and by a murmur of approbation.
No sooner had she passed out of the hall than she fainted again; but
this attack was without any grave consequences, and left no traces after
a few days.

I was so bewildered, so intoxicated by what she had just said, that
henceforth I could scarcely see what was taking place around me. Wholly
wrapped up in thoughts of my love, I nevertheless could not cast aside
all doubts; for, if Edmee had been silent about some of my actions, it
was also possible that she had exaggerated her affection for me in the
hope of extenuating my faults. I could not bring myself to think that
she had loved me before my departure for America, and, above all, from
the very beginning of my stay at Sainte-Severe. This was the one thought
that filled my mind; I did not even remember anything further about the
case or the object of my trial. It seemed to me that the sole question
at issue in this chill Areopagus was this: Is he loved, or is he not?
For me, victory or defeat, life or death, hung on that, and that alone.

I was roused from these reveries by the voice of Abbe Aubert. He was
thin and wasted, but seemed perfectly calm; he had been kept in solitary
confinement and had suffered all the hardships of prison life with the
resignation of a martyr. In spite, however, of all precautions, the
clever Marcasse, who could work his way anywhere like a ferret, had
managed to convey to him a letter from Arthur, to which Edmee had added
a few words. Authorized by this letter to say everything, he made a
statement similar to that made by Patience, and owned that Edmee’s first
words after the occurrence had made him believe me guilty; but that
subsequently, seeing the patient’s mental condition, and remembering my
irreproachable behaviour for more than six years, and obtaining a little
new light from the preceding trial and the public rumours about the
possible existence of Antony Mauprat, he had felt too convinced of my
innocence to be willing to give evidence which might injure me. If
he gave his evidence now, it was because he thought that further
investigations might have enlightened the court, and that his words
would not have the serious consequences they might have had a month
before.

Questioned as to Edmee’s feelings for me, he completely destroyed all
Mademoiselle Leblanc’s inventions, and declared that not only did Edmee
love me ardently, but that she had felt an affection for me from the
very first day we met. This he affirmed on oath, though emphasizing my
past misdeeds somewhat more than Edmee had done. He owned that at first
he had frequently feared that my cousin would be foolish enough to marry
me, but that he had never had any fear for her life, since he had always
seen her reduce me to submission by a single word or a mere look, even
in my most boorish days.

The continuation of the trial was postponed to await the results of the
warrants issued for the arrest of the assassin. People compared my trial
to that of Calas, and the comparison had no sooner become a general
topic of conversation than my judges, finding themselves exposed to a
thousand shafts, realized very vividly that hatred and prejudice are bad
counsellors and dangerous guides. The sheriff of the province declared
himself the champion of my cause and Edmee’s knight, and he himself
escorted her back to her father. He set all the police agog. They acted
with vigour and arrested John Mauprat. When he found himself a prisoner
and threatened, he betrayed his brother, and declared that they might
find him any night at Roche-Mauprat, hiding in a secret chamber which
the tenant’s wife helped him to reach, without her husband’s knowledge.

They took the Trappist to Roche-Mauprat under a good escort, so that he
might show them this secret chamber, which, in spite of his genius
for exploring walls and timber-work, the old pole-cat hunter and
mole-catcher Marcasse had never managed to reach. They took me there,
likewise, so that I might help to find this room or passage leading
to it, in case the Trappist should repent of his present sincere
intentions. Once again, then, I revisited this abhorred manor with the
ancient chief of the brigands transformed into a Trappist. He showed
himself so humble and cringing in my presence, he made so light of his
brother’s life, and expressed such abject submission that I was filled
with disgust, and after a few moments begged him not to speak to me any
more. Keeping in touch with the mounted police outside, we began our
search for the secret chamber. At first John had pretended that he
knew of its existence, without knowing its exact location now that
three-quarters of the keep had been destroyed. When he saw me, however,
he remembered that I had surprised him in my room, and that he had
disappeared through the wall. He resigned himself, therefore, to taking
us to it, and showing us the secret; this was very curious; but I will
not amuse myself by giving you an account of it. The secret chamber was
opened; no one was there. Yet the expedition had been made with despatch
and secrecy. It did not appear probable that John had had time to warn
his brother. The keep was surrounded by the police and all the doors
were well guarded. The night was dark, and our invasion had filled all
the inmates of the farm with terror. The tenant had no idea what we were
looking for, but his wife’s agitation and anxiety seemed a sure sign
that Antony was still in the keep. She had not sufficient presence of
mind to assume a reassured air after we had explored the first room, and
that made Marcasse think that there must be a second. Did the Trappist
know of this, and was he pretending ignorance? He played his part so
well that we were all deceived. We set to work to explore all the nooks
and corners of the ruins again. There was one large tower standing apart
from the other buildings; it did not seem as if this could offer any
one a refuge. The staircase had completely fallen in at the time of the
fire, and there could not be found a ladder long enough to reach the
top story; even the farmer’s ladders tied together with ropes were too
short. This top story seemed to be in a state of good preservation and
to contain a room lighted by two loopholes. Marcasse, after examining
the thickness of the wall, affirmed that there might be a staircase
inside, such as might be found in many an old tower. But where was the
exit? Perhaps it was connected with some subterranean passage. Would the
assassin dare to issue from his retreat as long as we were there? If, in
spite of the darkness of the night and the silence of our proceedings,
he had got wind of our presence, would he venture into the open as long
as we continued on the watch at all points?

“That is not probable,” said Marcasse. “We must devise some speedy means
of getting up there; and I see one.”

He pointed to a beam at a frightful height, all blackened by the fire,
and running from the tower over a space of some twenty feet to the
garrets of the nearest building. At the end of this beam there was
a large gap in the wall of the tower caused by the falling-in of the
adjoining parts. In his explorations, indeed, Marcasse had fancied that
he could see the steps of a narrow staircase through this gap. The wall,
moreover, was quite thick enough to contain one. The mole-catcher had
never cared to risk his life on this beam; not that he was afraid of
its narrowness or its height; he was accustomed to these perilous
“crossings,” as he called them; but the beam had been partly consumed
by the fire and was so thin in the middle that it was impossible to say
whether it would bear the weight of a man, even were he as slender
and diaphanous as the worthy sergeant. Up to the present nothing had
happened here of sufficient importance for him to risk his life in
the experiment. Now, however, the case was different. Marcasse did not
hesitate. I was not near him when he formed his plan; I should have
dissuaded him from it at all costs. I was not aware of it until he had
already reached the middle of the beam, the spot where the burnt wood
was perhaps nothing more than charcoal. How shall I describe to you
what I felt when I beheld my faithful friend in mid-air, gravely walking
toward his goal? Blaireau was trotting in front of him as calmly as in
the old days when it was a question of hunting through bundles of hay in
search of stoats and dormice. Day was breaking, and the hildalgo’s slim
outline and his modest yet stately bearing could be clearly seen against
the gray sky. I put my hands to my face; I seemed to hear the fatal beam
cracking; I stifled a cry of terror lest I should unnerve him at this
solemn and critical moment. But I could not suppress this cry, or help
raising my head when I heard two shots fired from the tower. Marcasse’s
hat fell at the first shot; the second grazed his shoulder. He stopped a
moment.

“Not touched!” he shouted at us.

And making a rush he was quickly across the aerial bridge. He got into
the tower through the gap and darted up the stairs, crying:

“Follow me, my lads! The beam will bear.”

Immediately five other bold and active men who had accompanied him got
astride upon the beam, and with the help of their hands reached the
other end one by one. When the first of them arrived in the garret
whither Antony Mauprat had fled, he found him grappling with Marcasse,
who, quite carried away by his triumph and forgetting that it was not a
question of killing an enemy but of capturing him, set about lunging
at him with his long rapier as if he had been a weasel. But the sham
Trappist was a formidable enemy. He had snatched the sword from the
sergeant’s hands, hurled him to the ground, and would have strangled
him had not a gendarme thrown himself on him from behind. With his
prodigious strength he held his own against the first three assailants;
but, with the help of the other two, they succeeded in overcoming him.
When he saw that he was caught he made no further resistance and let his
hands be bound together. They brought him down the stairs, which were
found to lead to the bottom of a dry well in the middle of the tower.
Antony was in the habit of leaving and entering by means of a ladder
which the farmer’s wife held for him and immediately afterwards
withdrew. In a transport of delight I threw myself into my sergeant’s
arms.

“A mere trifle,” he said; “enjoyed it. I found that my foot was still
sure and my head cool. Ha! ha! old sergeant,” he added, looking at his
leg, “old hidalgo, old mole-catcher, after this they won’t make so many
jokes about your calves!”




XXIX

If Anthony Mauprat had been a man of mettle he might have done me a
bad turn by declaring that he had been a witness of my attempt to
assassinate Edmee. As he had reasons for hiding himself before this last
crime, he could have explained why he had kept out of sight, and why he
had been silent about the occurrences at Gazeau Tower. I had nothing in
my favour except Patience’s evidence. Would this have been sufficient
to procure my acquittal? The evidence of so many others was against
me, even that given by my friends, and by Edmee, who could not deny my
violent temper and the possibility of such a crime.

But Antony, in words the most insolent of all the “Hamstringers,” was
the most cowardly in deeds. He no sooner found himself in the hands
of justice than he confessed everything, even before knowing that his
brother had thrown him over.

At his trial there were some scandalous scenes, in which the two
brothers accused each other in a loathsome way. The Trappist, whose rage
was kept in check by his hypocrisy, coldly abandoned the ruffian to his
fate, and denied that he had ever advised him to commit the crime. The
other, driven to desperation, accused him of the most horrible deeds,
including the poisoning of my mother, and Edmee’s mother, who had both
died of violent inflammation of the intestines within a short time of
each other. John Mauprat, he declared, used to be very skilful in the
art of preparing poisons and would introduce himself into houses under
various disguises to mix them with the food. He affirmed that, on
the day that Edmee had been brought to Roche-Mauprat, John had called
together all his brothers to discuss plans for making away with this
heiress to a considerable fortune, a fortune which he had striven
to obtain by crime, since he had tried to destroy the effects of the
Chevalier Hubert’s marriage. My mother’s life, too, had been the
price paid for the latter’s wish to adopt his brother’s child. All
the Mauprats had been in favour of making away with Edmee and myself
simultaneously, and John was actually preparing the poison when the
police happened to turn aside their hideous designs by attacking the
castle. John denied the charges with pretended horror, saying humbly
that he had committed quite enough mortal sins of debauchery and
irreligion without having these added to his list. As it was difficult
to take Antony’s word for them without further investigation; as this
investigation was almost impossible, and as the clergy were too powerful
and too much interested in preventing a scandal to allow it, John
Mauprat was acquitted on the charge of complicity and merely sent back
to the Trappist monastery; the archbishop forbade him ever to set foot
in the diocese again, and, moreover, sent a request to his superiors
that they would never allow him to leave the convent. He died there a
few years later in all the terrors of a fanatic penitence very much akin
to insanity.

It is probable that, as a result of feigning remorse in order to find
favour among his fellows, he had at last, after the failure of his
plans, and under the terrible asceticism of his order, actually
experienced the horrors and agonies of a bad conscience and tardy
repentance. The fear of hell is the only creed of vile souls.

No sooner was I acquitted and set at liberty, with my character
completely cleared, than I hastened to Edmee. I arrived in time to
witness my great-uncle’s last moments. Towards the end, though his mind
remained a blank as to past events, the memory of his heart returned. He
recognised me, clasped me to his breast, blessed me at the same time as
Edmee, and put my hand into his daughter’s. After we had paid the last
tribute of affection to our excellent and noble kinsman, whom we were as
grieved to lose as if we had not long foreseen and expected his death,
we left the province for some time, so as not to witness the execution
of Antony, who was condemned to be broken on the wheel. The two false
witnesses who had accused me were flogged, branded, and expelled from
the jurisdiction of the court. Mademoiselle Leblanc, who could not
exactly be accused of giving false evidence, since hers had consisted of
mere inferences from facts, avoided the public displeasure by going to
another province. Here she lived in sufficient luxury to make us suspect
that she had been paid considerable sums to bring about my ruin.

Edmee and I would not consent to be separated, even temporarily, from
our good friends, my sole defenders, Marcasse, Patience, Arthur, and the
Abbe Aubert. We all travelled in the same carriage; the first two, being
accustomed to the open air, were only too glad to sit outside; but we
treated them on a footing of perfect equality. From that day forth they
never sat at any table but our own. Some persons had the bad taste to
express astonishment at this; we let them talk. There are circumstances
that obliterate all distinctions, real or imaginary, of rank and
education.

We paid a visit to Switzerland. Arthur considered this was essential
to the complete restoration of Edmee’s health. The delicate, thoughtful
attentions of this devoted friend, and the loving efforts we made to
minister to her happiness, combined into the beautiful spectacle of the
mountains to drive away her melancholy and efface the recollection of
the troublous times through which we had just passed. On Patience’s
poetic nature Switzerland had quite a magic effect. He would frequently
fall into such a state of ecstasy that we were entranced and terrified
at the same time. He felt strongly tempted to build himself a chalet
in the heart of some valley and spend the rest of his life there in
contemplation of Nature; but his affection for us made him abandon this
project. As for Marcasse, he declared subsequently that, despite all the
pleasure he had derived from our society, he looked upon this visit
as the most unlucky event of his life. At the inn at Martigny, on our
return journey, Blaireau, whose digestion had been impaired by age,
fell a victim to the excess of hospitality shown him in the kitchen. The
sergeant said not a word, but gazed on him awhile with heavy eye, and
then went and buried him under the most beautiful rose-tree in the
garden; nor did he speak of his loss until more than a year later.

During our journey Edmee was for me a veritable angel of kindness and
tender thought; abandoning herself henceforth to all the inspirations of
her heart, and no longer feeling any distrust of me, or perhaps thinking
that I deserved some compensation for all my sufferings, she repeatedly
confirmed the celestial assurances of love which she had given in
public, when she lifted up her voice to proclaim my innocence. A few
reservations that had struck me in her evidence, and a recollection of
the damning words that had fallen from her lips when Patience found her
shot, continued, I must confess, to cause me pain for some time longer.
I thought, rightly perhaps, that Edmee had made a great effort to
believe in my innocence before Patience had given his evidence. But on
this point she always spoke most unwillingly and with a certain amount
of reserve. However, one day she quite healed my wound by saying with
her charming abruptness:

“And if I loved you enough to absolve you in my own heart, and defend
you in public at the cost of a lie, what would you say to that?”

A point on which I felt no less concern was to know how far I might
believe in the love which she declared she had had for me from the very
beginning of our acquaintance. Here she betrayed a little confusion, as
if, in her invincible pride, she regretted having revealed a secret she
had so jealously guarded. It was the abbe who undertook to confess for
her. He assured me that at that time he had frequently scolded Edmee for
her affection for “the young savage.” As an objection to this, I told
him of the conversation between Edmee and himself which I had overheard
one evening in the park. This I repeated with that great accuracy of
memory I possess. However, he replied:

“That very evening, if you had followed us a little further under the
trees, you might have overheard a dispute that would have completely
reassured you, and have explained how, from being repugnant (I may
almost say odious) to me, as you then were, you became at first
endurable, and gradually very dear.”

“You must tell me,” I exclaimed, “who worked the miracle.”

“One word will explain it,” he answered; “Edmee loved you. When she had
confessed this to me, she covered her face with her hands and remained
for a moment as if overwhelmed with shame and vexation; then suddenly
she raised her head and exclaimed:

“‘Well, since you wish to know the absolute truth, I love him! Yes,
I love him! I am smitten with him, as you say. It is not my fault; why
should I blush at it? I cannot help it; it is the work of fate. I have
never loved M. de la Marche; I merely feel a friendship for him. For
Bernard I have a very different feeling--a feeling so strong, so varied,
so full of unrest, of hatred, of fear, of pity, of anger, of tenderness,
that I understand nothing about it, and no longer try to understand
anything.’”

“‘Oh, woman, woman!’ I exclaimed, clasping my hands in bewilderment,
‘thou art a mystery, an abyss, and he who thinks to know thee is totally
mad!’

“‘As many times as you like, abbe,’ she answered, with a firmness in
which there were signs of annoyance and confusion, ‘it is all the same
to me. On this point I have lectured myself more than you have lectured
all your flocks in your whole life. I know that Bernard is a bear,
a badger, as Mademoiselle Leblanc calls him, a savage, a boor, and
anything else you like. There is nothing more shaggy, more prickly, more
cunning, more malicious than Bernard. He is an animal who scarcely knows
how to sign his name; he is a coarse brute who thinks he can break me in
like one of the jades of Varenne. But he makes a great mistake; I will
die rather than ever be his, unless he becomes civilized enough to
marry me. But one might as well expect a miracle. I try to improve him,
without daring to hope. However, whether he forces me to kill myself or
to turn nun, whether he remains as he is or becomes worse, it will be
none the less true that I love him. My dear abbe, you know that it must
be costing me something to make this confession; and, when my affection
for you brings me as a penitent to your feet and to your bosom, you
should not humiliate me by your expressions of surprise and your
exorcisms! Consider the matter now; examine, discuss, decide! Consider
the matter now; examine, discuss, decide! The evil is--I love him. The
symptoms are--I think of none but him, I see none but him; and I could
eat no dinner this evening because he had not come back. I find him
handsomer than any man in the world. When he says that he loves me, I
can see, I can feel that it is true; I feel displeased, and at the same
time delighted. M. de la Marche seems insipid and prim since I have
known Bernard. Bernard alone seems as proud, as passionate, as bold as
myself--and as weak as myself; for he cries like a child when I vex him,
and here I am crying, too, as I think of him.’”

“Dear abbe,” I said, throwing myself on his neck, “let me embrace you
till I have crushed your life out for remembering all this.”

“The abbe is drawing the long bow,” said Edmee archly.

“What!” I exclaimed, pressing her hands as if I would break them. “You
have made me suffer for seven years, and now you repent a few words that
console me . . .”

“In any case do not regret the past,” she said. “Ah, with you such as
you were in those days, we should have been ruined if I had not been
able to think and decide for both of us. Good God! what would have
become of us by now? You would have had far more to suffer from my
sternness and pride; for you would have offended me from the very first
day of our union, and I should have had to punish you by running away
or killing myself, or killing you--for we are given to killing in our
family; it is a natural habit. One thing is certain, and that is that
you would have been a detestable husband; you would have made me blush
for your ignorance; you would have wanted to rule me, and we should have
fallen foul of each other; that would have driven my father to despair,
and, as you know, my father had to be considered before everything. I
might, perhaps, have risked my own fate lightly enough, if I had been
alone in the world, for I have a strain of rashness in my nature; but
it was essential that my father should remain happy, and tranquil, and
respected. He had brought me up in happiness and independence, and I
should never have forgiven myself if I had deprived his old age of the
blessings he had lavished on my whole life. Do not think that I am full
of virtues and noble qualities, as the abbe pretends; I love, that is
all; but I love strongly, exclusively, steadfastly. I sacrificed you to
my father, my poor Bernard; and Heaven, who would have cursed us if I
had sacrificed my father, rewards us to-day by giving us to each other,
tried and not found wanting. As you grew greater in my eyes I felt
that I could wait, because I knew I had to love you long, and I was not
afraid of seeing my passion vanish before it was satisfied, as do the
passions of feeble souls. We were two exceptional characters; our loves
had to be heroic; the beaten track would have led both of us to ruin.”




XXX

We returned to Sainte-Severe at the expiration of Edmee’s period of
mourning. This was the time that had been fixed for our marriage. When
we had quitted the province where we had both experienced so many bitter
mortifications and such grievous trials, we had imagined that we
should never feel any inclination to return. Yet, so powerful are the
recollections of childhood and the ties of family life that, even in the
heart of an enchanted land which could not arouse painful memories, we
had quickly begun to regret our gloomy, wild Varenne, and sighed for the
old oaks in the park. We returned, then, with a sense of profound yet
solemn joy. Edmee’s first care was to gather the beautiful flowers in
the garden and to kneel by her father’s grave and arrange them on it. We
kissed the hallowed ground, and there made a vow to strive unceasingly
to leave a name as worthy of respect and veneration as his. He had
frequently carried this ambition to the verge of weakness, but it was a
noble weakness, a sacred vanity.

Our marriage was celebrated in the village chapel, and the festivities
were confined to the family; none but Arthur, the abbe, Marcasse, and
Patience sat down to our modest banquet. What need had we of the outside
world to behold our happiness? They might have believed, perhaps, that
they were doing us an honour by covering the blots on our escutcheon
with their august presence. We were enough to be happy and merry among
ourselves. Our hearts were filled with as much affection as they could
hold. We were too proud to ask more from any one, too pleased with one
another to yearn for greater pleasure. Patience returned to his sober,
retired life, resumed the duties of “great judge” and “treasurer” on
certain days of the week. Marcasse remained with me until his death,
which happened towards the end of the French Revolution. I trust I
did my best to repay his fidelity by an unreserved friendship and an
intimacy that nothing could disturb.

Arthur, who had sacrificed a year of his life to us, could not bring
himself to abjure the love of his country, and his desire to contribute
to its progress by offering it the fruits of his learning and the
results of his investigations; he returned to Philadelphia, where I paid
him a visit after I was left a widower.

I will not describe my years of happiness with my noble wife; such years
beggar description. One could not resign one’s self to living after
losing them, if one did not make strenuous efforts to avoid recalling
them too often. She gave me six children; four of these are still alive,
and all honourably settled in life. I have lived for them, in obedience
to Edmee’s dying command. You must forgive me for not speaking further
of this loss, which I suffered only ten years ago. I feel it now as
keenly as on the first day, and I do not seek to find consolation for
it, but to make myself worthy of rejoining the holy comrade of my life
in a better world after I have completed my period of probation in this.
She was the only woman I ever loved; never did any other win a glance
from me or know the pressure of my hand. Such is my nature; what I love
I love eternally, in the past, in the present, in the future.

The storms of the Revolution did not destroy our existence, nor did the
passions it aroused disturb the harmony of our private life. We gladly
gave up a large part of our property to the Republic, looking upon
it, indeed, as a just sacrifice. The abbe, terrified by the bloodshed,
occasionally abjured this political faith, when the necessities of the
hour were too much for the strength of his soul. He was the Girondin of
the family.

With no less sensibility, Edmee had greater courage; a woman and
compassionate, she sympathized profoundly with the sufferings of all
classes. She bewailed the misfortune of her age; but she never failed to
appreciate the greatness of its holy fanaticism. She remained faithful
to her ideas of absolute equality. At a time when the acts of the
Mountain were irritating the abbe, and driving him to despair, she
generously sacrificed her own patriotic enthusiasm; and her delicacy
would never let her mention in his presence certain names that made
him shudder, names for which she herself had a sort of passionate
veneration, the like of which I have never seen in any woman.

As for myself, I can truthfully say that it was she who educated me;
during the whole course of my life I had the profoundest respect for
her judgment and rectitude. When, in my enthusiasm, I was filled with
a longing to play a part as a leader of the people, she held me back by
showing how my name would destroy any influence I might have; since they
would distrust me, and imagine my aim was to use them as an instrument
for recovering my rank. When the enemy was at the gates of France, she
sent me to serve as a volunteer; when the Republic was overthrown, and
a military career came to be merely a means of gratifying ambition, she
recalled me, and said:

“You must never leave me again.”

Patience played a great part in the Revolution. He was unanimously
chosen as judge of his district. His integrity, his impartiality between
castle and cottage, his firmness and wisdom will never be forgotten in
Varenne.

During the war I was instrumental in saving M. de la Marche’s life, and
helping him to escape to a foreign country.

Such, I believe, said old Mauprat, are all the events of my life in
which Edmee played a part. The rest of it is not worth the telling.
If there is anything helpful in my story, try to profit by it, young
fellows. Hope to be blessed with a frank counsellor, a severe friend;
and love not the man who flatters, but the man who reproves. Do not
believe too much in phrenology; for I have the murderer’s bump largely
developed, and, as Edmee used to say with grim humour, “killing comes
natural” to our family. Do not believe in fate, or, at least, never
advise any one to tamely submit to it. Such is the moral of my story.


After this old Bernard gave us a good supper, and continued conversing
with us for the rest of the evening without showing any signs of
discomposure or fatigue. As we begged him to develop what he called
the moral of his story a little further, he proceeded to a few general
considerations which impressed me with their soundness and good sense.

I spoke of phrenology, he said, not with the object of criticising a
system which has its good side, in so far as it tends to complete
the series of physiological observations that aim at increasing our
knowledge of man; I used the word phrenology because the only fatality
that we believe in nowadays is that created by our own instincts. I do
not believe that phrenology is more fatalistic than any other system of
this kind; and Lavater, who was also accused of fatalism in his time,
was the most Christian man the Gospel has ever formed.

Do not believe in any absolute and inevitable fate; and yet acknowledge,
in a measure, that we are moulded by instincts, our faculties,
the impressions of our infancy, the surroundings of our earliest
childhood--in short, by all that outside world which has presided over
the development of our soul. Admit that we are not always absolutely
free to choose between good and evil, if you would be indulgent towards
the guilty--that is to say, just even as Heaven is just; for there
is infinite mercy in God’s judgments; otherwise His justice would be
imperfect.

What I am saying now is not very orthodox, but, take my word for it, it
is Christian, because it is true. Man is not born wicked; neither is he
born good, as is maintained by Jean Jacques Rousseau, my beloved Edmee’s
old master. Man is born with more or less of passions, with more or less
power to satisfy them, with more or less capacity for turning them to a
good or bad account in society. But education can and must find a remedy
for everything; that is the great problem to be solved, to discover the
education best suited to each individual. If it seems necessary that
education should be general and in common, does it follow that it ought
to be the same for all? I quite believe that if I had been sent to
school when I was ten, I should have become a civilized being earlier;
but would any one have thought of correcting my violent passions, and
of teaching me how to conquer them as Edmee did? I doubt it. Every
man needs to be loved before he can be worth anything; but each in
a different way; one with never-failing indulgence, another with
unflinching severity. Meanwhile, until some one solves the problem of
making education common to all, and yet appropriate to each, try to
improve one another.

Do you ask me how? My answer will be brief: by loving one another truly.
It is in this way--for the manners of a people mould their laws--that
you will succeed in suppressing the most odious and impious of all laws,
the _lex talionis_, capital punishment, which is nothing else than the
consecration of the principle of fatality, seeing that it supposes the
culprit incorrigible and Heaven implacable.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mauprat, by George Sand

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAUPRAT ***

***** This file should be named 2194-0.txt or 2194-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/9/2194/

Produced by Dagny; John Bickers and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

