?The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth
Edited by William Knight

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth
       Volume 1 of 8

Author: (Edited by William Knight)

Release Date: November 23, 2003 [EBook #10219]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POETRY OF WORDSWORTH ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Clytie Siddall and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





                              THE POETICAL WORKS

                                     OF



                              WILLIAM WORDSWORTH





                                  EDITED BY
                               WILLIAM KNIGHT


                                   VOL. I


                                    1896




CONTENTS

Extract from the Conclusion of a Poem, composed in Anticipation of
  leaving School
Written in very Early Youth
An Evening Walk
Lines written while Sailing in a Boat at Evening
Remembrance of Collins
Descriptive Sketches taken during a Pedestrian Tour among the Alps
Guilt and Sorrow; or, Incidents upon Salisbury Plain
Lines left upon a Seat in a Yew-tree, which stands near the lake of
  Esthwaite, on a desolate part of the shore, commanding a beautiful
  prospect
The Borderers
The Reverie of Poor Susan
1798
A Night Piece
We are Seven
Anecdote for Fathers
"A whirl-blast from behind the hill"
The Thorn
Goody Blake and Harry Gill
Her Eyes are Wild
Simon Lee, the Old Huntsman
Lines written in Early Spring
To my Sister
Expostulation and Reply
The Tables Turned
The Complaint of a Forsaken Indian Woman
The Last of the Flock
The Idiot Boy
The Old Cumberland Beggar
Animal Tranquillity and Decay

APPENDIX I.
APPENDIX II.
APPENDIX III.
APPENDIX IV.
APPENDIX V.
APPENDIX VI.
APPENDIX VII.
APPENDIX VIII.





PREFACE


During the decade between 1879 and 1889 I was engaged in a detailed
study of Wordsworth; and, amongst other things, edited a library edition
of his Poetical Works in eight volumes, including the "Prefaces" and
"Appendices" to his Poems, and a few others of his Prose Works, such as
his 'Description of the Scenery of the Lakes in the North of England'.
This edition was published by Mr. Paterson, Edinburgh, at intervals
between the years 1882 and 1886: and it was followed in 1889 by a 'Life
of Wordsworth', in three volumes, which was a continuation of the
previous eight.

The present edition is not a reproduction of those eleven volumes of
1882-9. It is true that to much of the editorial material included in
the latter--as well as in my 'Memorials of Coleorton', and in 'The
English Lake District as interpreted in the Poems of Wordsworth'--I can
add little that is new; but the whole of what was included in these
books has been revised, corrected, and readjusted in this one [1].
'Errata' in the previous volumes are corrected: several thousand new
notes have been added, many of the old ones are entirely recast: the
changes of text, introduced by Wordsworth into the successive editions
of his Poems, have all been revised; new readings--derived from many MS.
sources--have been added: while the chronological order of the Poems
has, in several instances, been changed, in the light of fresh evidence.

The distinctive features of my edition of 1882-6 were stated in the
Preface to its first volume. So far as these features remain in the
present edition, they may be repeated as follows:

FIRST, the Poems are arranged in chronological order of composition, not
of publication. In all the collective editions issued by Wordsworth
during his lifetime, the arrangement of his poems in artificial groups,
based on their leading characteristics--a plan first adopted in
1815--was adhered to; although he not unfrequently transferred a poem
from one group to another. Here they are printed, with one or two
exceptions to be afterwards explained, in the order in which they were
written.

SECOND, the changes of text made by Wordsworth in the successive
editions of his Poems, are given in footnotes, with the dates of the
changes.

THIRD, suggested changes, written by the Poet on a copy of the
stereotyped edition of 1836-7--long kept at Rydal Mount, and bought,
after Mrs. Wordsworth's death, at the sale of a portion of the Library
at the Mount--are given in footnotes.

FOURTH, the Notes dictated by Wordsworth to Miss Isabella Fenwick--a
dear friend of the Rydal Mount household, and a woman of remarkable
character and faculty--which tell the story of his Poems, and the
circumstances under which each was written, are printed in full.

FIFTH, Topographical Notes--explanatory of allusions made by Wordsworth
to localities in the Lake District of England, to places in Scotland,
Somersetshire, Yorkshire, the Isle of Man, and others on the Continent
of Europe--are given, either at the close of the Poem in which the
allusions occur, or as footnotes to the passages they illustrate.

SIXTH, several complete Poems, and other fragments of verse, not
included in any edition of his Works published during Wordsworth's
lifetime, or since, are printed as an appendix to Volume VIII.

SEVENTH, a new Bibliography of the Poems and Prose Works, and of the
several editions issued in England and America, from 1793 to 1850, is
added.

EIGHTH, a new Life of the Poet is given.

These features of the edition of 1882-6 are preserved in that of 1896,
and the following are added:

FIRST, The volumes are published, not in library 8vo size, but--as the
works of every poet should be issued--in one more convenient to handle,
and to carry. Eight volumes are devoted to the Poetical Works, and among
them are included those fragments by his sister Dorothy, and others,
which Wordsworth published in his lifetime among his own Poems. They are
printed in the chronological order of composition, so far as that is
known.

SECOND, In the case of each Poem, any Note written by Wordsworth
himself, as explanatory of it, comes first, and has the initials W. W.,
with the date of its first insertion placed after it. Next follows the
Fenwick Note, within square brackets, thus [ ], and signed I. F.; and,
afterwards, any editorial note required. When, however, Wordsworth's own
notes were placed at the end of the Poems, or at the foot of the page,
his plan is adopted, and the date appended. I should have been glad, had
it been possible--the editors of the twentieth century may note this--to
print Wordsworth's own notes, the Fenwick notes, and the Editor's in
different type, and in type of a decreasing size; but the idea occurred
to me too late, i. e. after the first volume had been passed for press.

THIRD, All the Prose Works of Wordsworth are given in full, and follow
the Poems, in two volumes. The Prose Works were collected by Dr.
Grosart, and published in 1876. Extracts from them have since been
edited by myself and others: but they will now be issued, like the
Poems, in chronological order, under their own titles, and with such
notes as seem desirable.

FOURTH, All the Journals written by Dorothy Wordsworth at Alfoxden, Dove
Cottage, and elsewhere, as well as her record of Tours with her brother
in Scotland, on the Continent, etc., are published--some of them in
full, others only in part. An explanation of why any Journal is
curtailed will be found in the editorial note preceding it. Much new
material will be found in these Journals.

FIFTH, The Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth--with a few from
Mary and Dora Wordsworth--are arranged chronologically, and published by
themselves. Hitherto, these letters have been scattered in many
quarters--in the late Bishop of Lincoln's 'Memoirs' of his uncle, in
'The Diary, Reminiscences, and Correspondence of Henry Crabb Robinson',
in the 'Memorials of Coleorton' and my own 'Life' of the Poet, in the
'Prose Works', in the 'Transactions of the Wordsworth Society', in the
'Letters of Charles Lamb', in the 'Memorials of Thomas De Quincey', and
other volumes; but many more, both of Wordsworth's and his sister's,
have never before seen the light. More than a hundred and fifty letters
from Dorothy Wordsworth to Mrs. Clarkson, the wife of the great
"slave-liberator," were sent to me some time ago by Mrs. Arthur
Tennyson, a relative of Mrs. Clarkson; and I have recently seen and been
allowed to copy, Wordsworth's letters to his early friend Francis
Wrangham, through the kindness of their late owner, Mr. Mackay of The
Grange, Trowbridge. Many other letters of great interest have recently
reached me.

SIXTH, In addition to a new Bibliography, and a Chronological Table of
the Poems, and the Prose Works, a Bibliography of Wordsworth Criticism
is appended. It includes most of the articles on the Poet, and notices
of his Works, which have appeared in Great Britain, America, and the
Continent of Europe. Under this head I have specially to thank Mrs.
Henry A. St. John of Ithaca, N.Y., a devoted Transatlantic
Wordsworthian, who has perhaps done more than any one--since Henry
Reed--to promote the study of her favourite poet in America. Mrs. St.
John's Wordsworth collection is unique, and her knowledge and enthusiasm
are as great as her industry has been. Professor E. Legouis of the
University of Lyons--who wrote an interesting book on Wordsworth's
friend, 'Le General Michel Beaupuy' (1891)--has sent me material from
France, which will be found in its proper place. Frau Professor Gothein
of Bonn, who has translated many of Wordsworth's poems into German, and
written his life, 'William Wordsworth: sein Leben, seine Werke, seine
Zeitgenossen', (1893), has similarly helped me in reference to German
criticism.

SEVENTH, As the Poet's Letters, and his sister's Journals, will appear
in earlier volumes, the new 'Life of Wordsworth' will be much shorter
than that which was published in 1889, in three volumes 8vo. It will not
exceed a single volume.

EIGHTH, In the edition of 1882-6, each volume contained an etching of a
locality associated with Wordsworth. The drawings were made by John
M'Whirter, R.A., in water-colour; and they were afterwards etched by Mr.
C. O. Murray. One portrait by Haydon was prefixed to the first volume of
the 'Life'. In each volume of this edition--Poems, Prose Works,
Journals, Letters, and Life--there will be a new portrait, either of the
poet, or his wife, or sister, or daughter; and also a small vignette of
a place associated with, or memorialised by Wordsworth in some way. The
following will be the arrangement.


 Vol.     PORTRAITS / VIGNETTES


THE POEMS.

   I.  W. Wordsworth, by W. Shuter.                         Cockermouth.

  II.  " " by Robert Hancock.           Dame Tyson's Cottage, Hawkshead.

 III.  " " by Edward Nash.        Room in St. John's College, Cambridge.

  IV.  " " by Richard Carruthers.                 Racedown, Dorsetshire.

   V.  " " by William Boxall.                   Alfoxden, Somersetshire.

  VI.  " " by Henry William Pickersgill.                         Goslar.

 VII.  " " by Margaret Gillies.                            Dove Cottage.

VIII.  " " by Benjamin R. Haydon.          The Rock of Names, Thirlmere.


THE PROSE WORKS.

  IX.  " " by Henry Inman.                       Gallow Hill, Yorkshire.

   X.  " " by Margaret Gillies.          Coleorton Hall, Leicestershire.


THE JOURNALS.

  XI.  Dorothy Wordsworth, (Artist unknown).       Allan Bank, Grasmere.

 XII.  Mary Wordsworth, by Margaret Gillies.                Rydal Mount.


CORRESPONDENCE.

XIII.  Dora Wordsworth, by Margaret Gillies.               Bolton Abbey.

 XIV.  W. Wordsworth, by Edward C. Wyon.                      Blea Tarn.

  XV.  " "  by Thomas Woolner.                             Peele Castle.


THE LIFE.

 XVI.  " " by Frederick Thrupp.          Grasmere Church and Churchyard.

       " " by Samuel Laurence.

       " " by Benjamin R. Haydon.


All the etchings will be prepared by H. Manesse. The portraits, with
many others, will be described in detail in a subsequent volume.

In all editorial notes the titles given by Wordsworth to his Poems are
invariably printed in italics, not with inverted commas before and
after, as Wordsworth himself so often printed them: and when he gave no
title to a poem, its first line will be invariably placed within
inverted commas. This plan of using Italics, and not Roman letters,
applies also to the title of any book referred to by Wordsworth, or by
his sister in her Journals. Whether they put the title in italics, or
within commas, it is always italicised in this edition.

A subsidiary matter such as this becomes important when one finds that
many editors of parts of the Works of Wordsworth, or of Selections from
them, have invented titles of their own; and have sent their volumes to
press without the slightest indication to their readers that the titles
were not Wordsworth's; mixing up their own notion of what best described
the contents of the Poem, or the Letter, with those of the writer. Some
have suppressed Wordsworth's, and put their own title in its place!
Others have contented themselves (more modestly) with inventing a title
when Wordsworth gave none. I do not object to these titles in
themselves. Several, such as those by Archbishop Trench, are suggestive
and valuable. What I object to is that any editor--no matter who--should
mingle his own titles with those of the Poet, and give no indication to
the reader as to which is which. Dr. Grosart has been so devoted a
student of Wordsworth, and we owe him so much, that one regrets to find
in "The Prose Works of Wordsworth" (1876) the following title given to
his letter to the Bishop of Llandaff, 'Apology for the French
Revolution'. It is interesting to know that Dr. Grosart thought this a
useful description of the letter: but a clear indication should have
been given that it was not Wordsworth's. It is true that, in the general
preface to his volumes, Dr. Grosart takes upon himself the
responsibility for this title; but it should not have been printed as
the title in chief, or as the headline to the text. Similarly, with the
titles of the second and third of the three 'Essays on Epitaphs'.

As students of Wordsworth know, he issued a volume in 1838 containing
all his sonnets then written; and, at the close of that edition, he
added, "The six Sonnets annexed were composed as this Volume was going
through the Press, but too late for insertion in the class of
miscellaneous ones to which they belong." In 1884, Archbishop Trench
edited the sonnets, with an admirable introductory "Essay on the History
of the English Sonnet"; but, while Wordsworth gave no title to the 3rd
and the 4th of the six, "composed as the Volume was going through the
Press,"--either in his edition of 1838, 'or in any subsequent issue' of
his Poems--his editor did so. He gave what are really excellent titles,
but he does not tell us that they are his own! He calls them
respectively 'The Thrush at Twilight', and 'The Thrush at Dawn'.
Possibly Wordsworth would have approved of both of those titles: but,
that they are not his, should have been indicated.

I do not think it wise, from an editorial point of view, even to print
in a "Chronological Table"--as Professor Dowden has done, in his
admirable Aldine edition--titles which were not Wordsworth's, without
some indication to that effect. But, in the case of Selections from
Wordsworth--such as those of Mr. Hawes Turner, and Mr. A. J.
Symington,--every one must feel that the editor should have informed his
readers 'when' the title was Wordsworth's, and 'when' it was his own
coinage. In the case of a much greater man--and one of Wordsworth's most
illustrious successors in the great hierarchy of English poesy, Matthew
Arnold--it may be asked why should he have put 'Margaret, or the Ruined
Cottage', as the title of a poem written in 1795-7, when Wordsworth
never once published it under that name? It was an extract from the
first book of 'The Excursion'--written, it is true, in these early
years,--but only issued as part of the latter poem, first published in
1814.

The question of the number, the character, and the length of the Notes,
which a wise editor should append to the works of a great poet, (or to
any classic), is perhaps still 'sub judice'. My own opinion is that, in
all editorial work, the notes should be illustrative rather than
critical; and that they should only bring out those points, which the
ordinary reader of the text would not readily understand, if the poems
were not annotated. For this reason, topographical, historical, and
antiquarian notes are almost essential. The Notes which Wordsworth
himself wrote to his Poems, are of unequal length and merit. It was
perhaps necessary for him to write--at all events it is easy to
understand, and to sympathise with, his writing--the long note on the
revered parson of the Duddon Valley, the Rev. Robert Walker, who will be
remembered for many generations as the "Wonderful Walker." The Poet's
editors have also been occasionally led to add digressive notes, to
clear up points which had been left by himself either dubious, or
obscure. I must plead guilty to the charge of doing so: e.g. the
identification of "The Muccawiss" (see 'The Excursion', book iii. l.
953) with the Whip-poor-Will involved a great deal of laborious
correspondence years ago. It was a question of real difficulty; and,
although the result reached could now be put into two or three lines, I
have thought it desirable that the opinions of those who wrote about it,
and helped toward the solution, should be recorded. What I print is only
a small part of the correspondence that took place.

On the other hand, it would be quite out of place, in a note to the
famous passage in the 4th book of 'The Excursion', beginning

  ... I have seen
  A curious child applying to his ear

to enter on a discussion as to the extent of Wordsworth's debt--if
any--to the author of 'Gebir'. It is quite sufficient to print the
relative passage from Landor's poem at the foot of the page.

All the Notes written by Wordsworth himself in his numerous editions
will be found in this one, with the date of their first appearance
added. Slight textual changes, however, or casual 'addenda', are not
indicated, unless they are sufficiently important. Changes in the text
of notes have not the same importance to posterity, as changes in the
text of poems. In the preface to the Prose Works, reference will be made
to Wordsworth's alterations of his text. At present I refer only to his
own notes to his Poems. When they were written as footnotes to the page,
they remain footnotes still. When they were placed by him as prefaces to
his Poems, they retain that place in this edition; but when they were
appendix notes--as e.g. in the early editions of "Lyrical Ballads"--they
are now made footnotes to the Poems they illustrate. In such a case,
however, as the elaborate note to 'The Excursion', containing a reprint
of the 'Essay upon Epitaphs'--originally contributed to "The Friend"--it
is transferred to the Prose Works, to which it belongs by priority of
date; and, as it would be inexpedient to print it twice over, it is
omitted from the notes to 'The Excursion'.

As to the place which Notes to a poet's works should occupy, there is no
doubt that numerous and lengthy ones--however valuable, or even
necessary, by way of illustration,--disfigure the printed page; and some
prefer that they should be thrown all together at the end of each
volume, or at the close of a series; such as--in Wordsworth's case--"The
River Duddon," "Ecclesiastical Sonnets," 'The Prelude', 'The White Doe
of Rylstone', etc. I do not think, however, that many care to turn
repeatedly to the close of a series of poems, or the end of a volume, to
find an explanatory note, helped only by an index number, and when
perhaps even that does not meet his eye at the foot of the page. I do
not find that even ardent Wordsworth students like to search for notes
in "appendices"; and perhaps the more ardent they are the less desirable
is it for them thus "to hunt the waterfalls."

I have the greatest admiration for the work which Professor Dowden has
done in his edition of Wordsworth; but the 'plan' which he has followed,
in his Aldine edition, of giving not only the Fenwick Notes, but all the
changes of text introduced by Wordsworth into his successive editions,
in additional editorial notes at the end of each volume--to understand
which the reader must turn the pages repeatedly, from text to note and
note to text, forwards and backwards, at times distractingly--is for
practical purposes almost unworkable. The reader who examines Notes
'critically' is ever "one among a thousand," even if they are printed at
the foot of the page, and meet the eye readily. If they are consigned to
the realm of 'addenda' they will be read by very few, and studied by
fewer.

To those who object to Notes being "thrust into view" (as it must be
admitted that they are in this edition)--because it disturbs the
pleasure of the reader who cares for the poetry of Wordsworth, and for
the poetry alone--I may ask how many persons have read the Fenwick
Notes, given together in a series, and mixed up heterogeneously with
Wordsworth's own Notes to his poems, in comparison with those who have
read and enjoyed them in the editions of 1857 and 1863? Professor Dowden
justifies his plan of relegating the Fenwick and other notes to the end
of each volume of his edition, on the ground that students of the Poet
'must' take the trouble of hunting to and fro for such things. I greatly
doubt if many who have read and profited--for they could not but
profit--by a perusal of Professor Dowden's work, 'have' taken that
trouble, or that future readers of the Aldine edition will take it.

To refer, somewhat more in detail, to the features of this edition.


FIRST. As to the 'Chronological Order' of the Poems.

The chief advantage of a chronological arrangement of the Works of any
author--and especially of a poet who himself adopted a different
plan--is that it shows us, as nothing else can do, the growth of his own
mind, the progressive development of his genius and imaginative power.
By such a redistribution of what he wrote we can trace the rise, the
culmination, and also--it may be--the decline and fall of his genius.
Wordsworth's own arrangement--first adopted in the edition of 1815--was
designed by him, with the view of bringing together, in separate
classes, those Poems which referred to the same (or similar) subjects,
or which were supposed to be the product of the same (or a similar)
faculty, irrespective of the date of composition. Thus one group was
entitled "Poems of the Fancy," another "Poems of the Imagination," a
third "Poems proceeding from Sentiment and Reflection," a fourth
"Epitaphs and Elegiac Pieces," again "Poems on the Naming of Places,"
"Memorials of Tours," "Ecclesiastical Sonnets," "Miscellaneous Sonnets,"
etc. The principle which guided him in this was obvious enough. It was,
in some respects, a most natural arrangement; and, in now adopting a
chronological order, the groups, which he constructed with so much care,
are broken up. Probably every author would attach more importance to a
classification of his Works, which brought them together under
appropriate headings, irrespective of date, than to a method of
arrangement which exhibited the growth of his own mind; and it may be
taken for granted that posterity would not think highly of any author
who attached special value to this latter element. None the less
posterity may wish to trace the gradual development of genius, in the
imaginative writers of the past, by the help of such a subsequent
rearrangement of their Works.

There are difficulties, however, in the way of such a rearrangement,
some of which, in Wordsworth's case, cannot be entirely surmounted. In
the case of itinerary Sonnets, referring to the same subject, the
dismemberment of a series--carefully arranged by their author--seems to
be specially unnatural. But Wordsworth himself sanctioned the principle.
If there was a fitness in collecting all his sonnets in one volume in
the year 1838, out of deference to the wishes of his friends, in order
that these poems might be "brought under the eye at once"--thus removing
them from their original places, in his collected works--it seems
equally fitting now to rearrange them chronologically, as far as it is
possible to do so. It will be seen that it is not always possible.

Then, there is the case of two Poems following each other, in
Wordsworth's own arrangement, by natural affinity; such as the 'Epistle
to Sir George Beaumont', written in 1811, which in almost all existing
editions is followed by the Poem written in 1841, and entitled, 'Upon
perusing the foregoing Epistle thirty years after its composition'; or,
the dedication to 'The White Doe of Rylstone', written in April 1815,
while the Poem itself was written in 1807. To separate these Poems seems
unnatural; and, as it would be inadmissible to print the second of the
two twice over--once as a sequel to the first poem, and again in its
chronological place--adherence to the latter plan has its obvious
disadvantage in the case of these poems.

Mr. Aubrey de Vere is very desirous that I should arrange all the "Poems
dedicated to National Independence and Liberty" together in series, as
Wordsworth left them, "on the principle that, though the order of
publication should as a rule be the order of composition in poetry, all
rules require, as well as admit of, exceptions." As I have the greatest
respect for the judgment of such an authority as Mr. de Vere, I may
explain that I only venture to differ from him because there are
seventy-four Poems--including the sonnets and odes--in this series, and
because they cover a period ranging from 1802 to 1815. I am glad,
however, that many of these sonnets can be printed together, especially
the earlier ones of 1802.

After carefully weighing every consideration, it has seemed to me
desirable to adopt the chronological arrangement in this particular
edition; in which an attempt is made to trace the growth of Wordsworth's
genius, as it is unfolded in his successive works. His own arrangement
of his Poems will always possess a special interest and value; and it is
not likely ever to be entirely superseded in subsequent issues of his
Works. The editors and publishers of the future may possibly prefer it
to the plan now adopted, and it will commend itself to many readers from
the mere fact that 'it was Wordsworth's own'; but in an edition such as
the present--which is meant to supply material for the study of the Poet
to those who may not possess, or have access to, the earlier and rarer
editions--no method of arrangement can be so good as the chronological
one. Its importance will be obvious after several volumes are published,
when the point referred to above--viz. the evolution of the poet's
genius--will be shown by the very sequence of the subjects chosen, and
their method of treatment from year to year.

The date of the composition of Wordsworth's Poems cannot always be
ascertained with accuracy: and to get at the chronological order, it is
not sufficient to take up his earlier volumes, and thereafter to note
the additions made in subsequent ones. We now know (approximately) when
each poem was first published; although, in some instances, they
appeared in newspapers and magazines, and in many cases publication was
long after the date of composition. For example, 'Guilt and Sorrow; or,
Incidents upon Salisbury Plain'--written in the years 1791-94--was not
published 'in extenso' till 1842. The tragedy of 'The Borderers',
composed in 1795-96, was also first published in 1842. 'The
Prelude'--"commenced in the beginning of the year 1799, and completed in
the summer of 1805"--was published posthumously in 1850: and some
unpublished poems--both "of early and late years"--were first issued in
1886. A poem was frequently kept back, from some doubt as to its worth,
or from a wish to alter and amend it. Of the five or six hundred sonnets
that he wrote, Wordsworth said "Most of them were frequently re-touched;
and, not a few, laboriously." Some poems were almost entirely recast;
and occasionally fugitive verses were withheld from publication for a
time, because it was hoped that they would subsequently form part of a
larger whole.

In the case of many of the poems, we are left to conjecture the date of
composition, although we are seldom without some clue to it. The Fenwick
Notes are a great assistance in determining the chronology. These
notes--which will be afterwards more fully referred to--were dictated by
Wordsworth to Miss Fenwick in the year 1843; but, at that time, his
memory could not be absolutely trusted as to dates; and in some
instances we know it to have been at fault. For example, he said of 'The
Old Cumberland Beggar' that it was "written at Racedown and Alfoxden in
my twenty-third year." Now, he went to Racedown in the autumn of 1795,
when he was twenty-five years old; and to Alfoxden, in the autumn of
1797, when twenty-seven. Again, the poem 'Rural Architecture' is put
down in the Fenwick note as "written at Townend in 1801"; but it had
been published in 1800, in the second edition of "Lyrical Ballads."
Similarly Wordsworth gave the dates "1801 or 1802" for 'The Reverie of
Poor Susan', which had also appeared in "Lyrical Ballads," 1800.

Wordsworth's memory was not always to be trusted even when he was
speaking of a group of his own Poems. For example, in the edition of
1807, there is a short series described thus, "Poems, composed during a
tour, chiefly on foot." They are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Now, one would
naturally suppose that all the poems, in this set of five, were composed
during the same pedestrian tour, and that they all referred to the same
time. But the series contains 'Alice Fell' (1802), 'Beggars' (1802), 'To
a Sky-Lark' (1805), and 'Resolution and Independence' (1802).

Much more valuable than the Fenwick notes--for a certain portion of
Wordsworth's life--is his sister Dorothy's Journal. The mistakes in the
former can frequently be corrected from the minutely kept diary of those
early years, when the brother and sister lived together at Grasmere. The
whole of that Journal, so far as it is desirable to print it for
posterity, will be given in a subsequent volume.

Long before the publication of the Fenwick notes, Wordsworth himself
supplied some data for a chronological arrangement of his Works. In the
table of contents, prefixed to the first collected edition of 1815, in
two volumes,--and also to the second collected edition of 1820, in four
volumes,--there are two parallel columns: one giving the date of
composition, and the other that of publication. There are numerous
blanks in the former column, which was the only important one; as the
year of publication could be ascertained from the editions themselves.
Sometimes the date is given vaguely; as in the case of the "Sonnets
dedicated to Liberty," where the note runs, "from the year 1807 to
1813." At other times, the entry of the year of publication is
inaccurate; for example, the 'Inscription for the spot where the
Hermitage stood on St. Herbert's Island, Derwentwater', is put down as
belonging to the year 1807; but this poem does not occur in the volumes
of 1807, but in the second volume of "Lyrical Ballads" (1800). It will
thus be seen that it is only by comparing Wordsworth's own lists of the
years to which his Poems belong, with the contents of the several
editions of his Works, with the Fenwick Notes, and with his sister's
Journal, that we can approximately reconstruct the true chronology. To
these sources of information must be added the internal evidence of the
Poems themselves, incidental references in letters to friends, and stray
hints gathered from various quarters.

Many new sources of information as to the date of the composition of the
Poems became known to me during the publication of my previous edition,
and after its issue; the most important being the Journals of Dorothy
Wordsworth. These discoveries showed that my chronological table of
1882--although then, relatively, "up to date"--was incomplete. The
tables constructed by Mr. Tutin and by Professor Dowden are both more
accurate than it was. It is impossible to attain to finality in such a
matter; and several facts, afterwards discovered, and mentioned in the
later volumes of my previous edition, have been used against the
conclusions come to in the earlier ones. I have thus supplied the
feathers for a few subsequent critical arrows. The shots have not been
unkindly ones; and I am glad of the result, viz. that our knowledge of
the dates--both as to the composition and first publication of the poems
--is now much more exact than before. When a conjectural one is given in
this edition, the fact is always mentioned.

This chronological method of arrangement, however, has its limits. It is
not possible always to adopt it: nor is it invariably 'necessary', even
in order to obtain a true view of the growth of Wordsworth's mind. In
this--as in so many other things--wisdom lies in the avoidance of
extremes; the extreme of rigid fidelity to the order of time on the one
hand, and the extreme of an irrational departure from it on the other.
While an effort has been made to discover the exact order of the
composition of the poems--and this is shown, not only in the
Chronological Table, but at the beginning of each separate poem--it has
been considered expedient to depart from that order in printing some of
the poems. In certain cases a poem was begun and laid aside, and again
resumed at intervals; and it is difficult to know to what year the
larger part of it should be assigned. When we know the date at which a
poem was commenced, and that it was finished "long afterwards," but have
no clue as to the year, it is assigned to the year in which it was
begun. For example, the 'Address to Kilchurn Castle' was begun in 1803,
but only the first three lines were written then. Wordsworth tells us
that "the rest was added many years after," but when we know not; and
the poem was not published till 1827. In such a case, it is placed in
this edition as if it belonged chronologically to 1803, and retains its
place in the series of Poems which memorialise the Tour in Scotland of
that year. On a similar principle, 'The Highland Girl' is placed in the
same series; although Dorothy Wordsworth tells us, in her Journal of the
Tour, that it was composed "not long after our return from Scotland";
and 'Glen Almain'--although written afterwards at Rydal--retains its
published place in the memorial group. Again the 'Departure from the
Vale of Grasmere, August 1803', is prefixed to the same series; although
it was not written till 1811, and first published in 1827. To give
symmetry to such a Series, it is necessary to depart from the exact
chronological order--the departure being duly indicated.

On the same principle I have followed the 'Address to the Scholars of
the Village School of----', by its natural sequel--'By the Side of the
Grave some Years after', the date of the composition of which is
unknown: and the 'Epistle to Sir George Beaumont' (1811) is followed by
the later Lines, to which Wordsworth gave the most prosaic title--he was
often infelicitous in his titles--'Upon perusing the foregoing Epistle
thirty years after its composition'. A like remark applies to the poem
'Beggars', which is followed by its own 'Sequel', although the order of
date is disturbed; while all the "Epitaphs," translated from Chiabrera,
are printed together.

It is manifestly appropriate that the poems belonging to a series--such
as the "Ecclesiastical Sonnets," or those referring to the
"Duddon"--should be brought together, as Wordsworth finally arranged
them; even although we may be aware that some of them were written
subsequently, and placed in the middle of the series. The sonnets
referring to "Aspects of Christianity in America"--inserted in the 1845
and 1849-50 editions of the collected Works--are found in no previous
edition or version of the "Ecclesiastical Sonnets." These, along with
some others on the Offices of the English Liturgy, were suggested to
Wordsworth by an American prelate, Bishop Doane, and by Professor Henry
Reed; [2] but we do not know in what year they were written. The
"Ecclesiastical Sonnets"--first called "Ecclesiastical Sketches"--were
written in the years 1820-22. The above additions to them appeared
twenty-five years afterwards; but they ought manifestly to retain their
place, as arranged by Wordsworth in the edition of 1845. The case is
much the same with regard to the "Duddon Sonnets." They were first
published in 1820: but No. xiv. beginning:

  O mountain Stream! the Shepherd and his Cot,

was written in the year 1806, and appears in the edition of 1807. This
sonnet will be printed in the series to which it belongs, and not in its
chronological place. I think it would be equally unjust to remove it
from the group--in which it helps to form a unity--and to print it twice
over. [3] On the other hand, the series of "Poems composed during a Tour
in Scotland, and on the English Border, in the Autumn of 1831"--and
first published in the year 1835, in the volume entitled "Yarrow
Revisited, and Other Poems"--contains two, which Wordsworth himself
tells us were composed earlier; and there is no reason why these poems
should not be restored to their chronological place. The series of
itinerary sonnets, published along with them in the Yarrow volume of
1835, is the record of another Scottish tour, taken in the year 1833;
and Wordsworth says of them that they were "composed 'or suggested'
during a tour in the summer of 1833." We cannot now discover which of
them were written during the tour, and which at Rydal Mount after his
return; but it is obvious that they should be printed in the order in
which they were left by him, in 1835. It may be noted that almost all
the "Evening Voluntaries" belong to these years--1832 to 1835--when the
author was from sixty-two to sixty-five years of age.

Wordsworth's habit of revision may perhaps explain the mistakes into
which he occasionally fell as to the dates of his Poems, and the
difficulty of reconciling what he says, as to the year of composition,
with the date assigned by his sister in her Journal. When he says
"written in 1801, or 1802," he may be referring to the last revision
which he gave to his work. Certain it is, however, that he sometimes
gave a date for the composition, which was subsequent to the publication
of the poem in question.

In the case of those poems to which no date was attached, I have tried
to find a clue by which to fix an approximate one. Obviously, it would
not do to place all the undated poems in a class by themselves. Such an
arrangement would be thoroughly artificial; and, while we are in many
instances left to conjecture, we can always say that such and such a
poem was composed not later than a particular year. When the precise
date is undiscoverable, I have thought it best to place the poem in or
immediately before the year in which it was first published.

Poems which were several years in process of composition, having been
laid aside, and taken up repeatedly; 'e.g. The Prelude', which was
composed between the years 1799 and 1805--are placed in the year in
which they were finished. Disputable questions as to the date of any
poem are dealt with in the editorial note prefixed or appended to it.

There is one Poem which I have intentionally placed out of its
chronological place, viz. the 'Ode, Intimations of Immortality from
Recollections of Early Childhood'. It was written at intervals from 1803
to 1806, and was first published in the edition of 1807, where it stood
at the end of the second volume. In every subsequent edition of the
collected Works--1815 to 1850--it closed the groups of poems; 'The
Excursion' only following it, in a volume of its own. This was an
arrangement made by Wordsworth, of set purpose, and steadily adhered
to--the 'Ode' forming as it were the High Altar of his poetic Cathedral.
As he wished it to retain that place in subsequent editions of his
Works, it retains it in this one.

Mr. Arnold's arrangement of the Poems, in his volume of Selections [4],
is extremely interesting and valuable; but, as to the method of grouping
adopted, I am not sure that it is better than Wordsworth's own. As a
descriptive title, "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection" is quite as good
as "Poems akin to the Antique," and "Poems of the Fancy" quite as
appropriate as "Poems of Ballad Form."

Wordsworth's arrangement of his Poems in groups was psychologically very
interesting; but it is open to many objections. Unfortunately Wordsworth
was not himself consistent--in the various editions issued by
himself--either in the class into which he relegated each poem, or the
order in which he placed it there. There is tantalising topsy-turvyism
in this, so that an editor who adopts it is almost compelled to select
Wordsworth's latest grouping, which was not always his best.

Sir William Rowan Hamilton wrote to Mr. Aubrey de Vere in 1835 that Dora
Wordsworth told him that her father "was sometimes at a loss whether to
refer her to the 'Poems of the Imagination,' or the 'Poems of the
Fancy,' for some particular passage." Aubrey de Vere himself considered
Wordsworth's arrangement as "a parade of system," and wrote of it, "I
cannot help thinking that in it, he mistakes classification for method."
[5] I confess that it is often difficult to see why some of the poems
were assigned by their author to the realm of the "Fancy," the
"Imagination," and "Sentiment and Reflection" respectively. In a note to
'The Horn of Egremont Castle' (edition 1815) Wordsworth speaks of it as
"referring to the imagination," rather than as being "produced by it";
and says that he would not have placed it amongst his "Poems of the
Imagination," "but to avoid a needless multiplication of classes"; and
in the editions of 1827 and 1832 he actually included the great 'Ode' on
Immortality among his "Epitaphs and Elegiac Poems"! As late as 27th
September 1845, he wrote to Professor Henry Reed,

  "Following your example" (i. e. the example set in Reed's American
  edition of the Poems), "I have greatly extended the class entitled
  'Poems of the Imagination,' thinking as you must have done that, if
  Imagination were predominant in the class, it was not indispensable
  that it should pervade every poem which it contained. Limiting the
  class as I had done before, seemed to imply, and to the uncandid or
  observing did so, that the faculty, which is the 'primum mobile' in
  poetry, had little to do, in the estimation of the author, with pieces
  not arranged under that head. I therefore feel much obliged to you for
  suggesting by your practice the plan which I have adopted."

Could anything show more explicitly than this that Wordsworth was not
perfectly satisfied with his own artificial groups? Professor Reed, in
his American edition of 1837, however, acted on Wordsworth's expressed
intention of distributing the contents of "Yarrow Revisited, and Other
Poems" amongst the classes. He tells us that he "interspersed the
contents of this volume among the Poems already arranged" by Wordsworth.
[6]

It may also be mentioned that not only members of his own household, but
many of Wordsworth's friends--notably Charles Lamb--expressed a
preference for a different arrangement of his Poems from that which he
had adopted.


SECOND The various Readings, or variations of text, made by Wordsworth
during his lifetime, or written by him on copies of his Poems, or
discovered in MS. letters, from himself, or his sister, or his wife, are
given in footnotes in this edition. Few English poets changed their text
more frequently, or with more fastidiousness, than Wordsworth did. He
did not always alter it for the better. Every alteration however, which
has been discovered by me, whether for the better or for the worse, is
here printed in full. We have thus a record of the fluctuations of his
own mind as to the form in which he wished his Poems to appear; and this
record casts considerable light on the development of his genius. [7]

A knowledge of these changes of text can only be obtained in one or
other of two ways. Either the reader must have access to all the
thirty-two editions of Poems, the publication of which Wordsworth
personally supervised; or, he must have all the changes in the
successive editions, exhibited in the form of footnotes, and appended to
the particular text that is selected and printed in the body of the
work. It is extremely difficult--in some cases quite impossible--to
obtain the early editions. The great public libraries of the country do
not possess them all.[8] It is therefore necessary to fall back upon the
latter plan, which seems the only one by which a knowledge of the
changes of the text can be made accessible, either to the general
reader, or to the special student of English Poetry.

The text which--after much consideration--I have resolved to place
throughout, in the body of the work, is Wordsworth's own final 'textus
receptus', i.e. the text of 1849-50, reproduced in the posthumous
edition of 1857; [9] and since opinion will doubtless differ as to the
wisdom of this selection, it may be desirable to state at some length
the reasons which have led me to adopt it.

There are only three possible courses open to an editor, who wishes to
give--along with the text selected--all the various readings
chronologically arranged as footnotes. Either, 1st, the earliest text
may be taken, or 2nd, the latest may be chosen, or 3rd, the text may be
selected from different editions, so as to present each poem in its best
state (according to the judgment of the editor), in whatever edition it
is found. A composite text, made up from two or more editions, would be
inadmissible.

Now, most persons who have studied the subject know that Wordsworth's
best text is to be found, in one poem in its earliest edition, in
another in its latest, and in a third in some intermediate edition. I
cannot agree either with the statement that he always altered for the
worse, or that he always altered for the better. His critical judgment
was not nearly so unerring in this respect as Coleridge's was, or as
Tennyson's has been. It may be difficult, therefore, to assign an
altogether satisfactory reason for adopting either the earliest or the
latest text; and at first sight, the remaining alternative plan may seem
the wisest of the three. There are indeed difficulties in the way of the
adoption of any one of the methods suggested; and as I adopt the latest
text--not because it is always intrinsically the best, but on other
grounds to be immediately stated--it may clear the way, if reference be
made in the first instance to the others, and to the reasons for
abandoning them.

As to a selection of the text from various editions, this would
doubtless be the best plan, were it a practicable one; and perhaps it
may be attainable some day. But Wordsworth is as yet too near us for
such an editorial treatment of his Works to be successful. The
fundamental objection to it is that scarcely two minds--even among the
most competent of contemporary judges--will agree as to what the best
text is. An edition arranged on this principle could not possibly be
acceptable to more than a few persons. Of course no arrangement of any
kind can escape adverse criticism: it would be most unfortunate if it
did. But this particular edition would fail in its main purpose, if
questions of individual taste were made primary, and not secondary; and
an arrangement, which gave scope for the arbitrary selection of
particular texts,--according to the wisdom, or the want of wisdom, of
the editor,--would deservedly meet with severe criticism in many
quarters. Besides, such a method of arrangement would not indicate the
growth of the Poet's mind, and the development of his genius. If an
editor wished to indicate his own opinion of the best text for each
poem--under the idea that his judgment might be of some use to other
people--it would be wiser to do so by means of some mark or marginal
note, than by printing his selected text in the main body of the work.
He could thus at once preserve the chronological order of the readings,
indicate his own preference, and leave it to others to select what they
preferred. Besides, the compiler of such an edition would often find
himself in doubt as to what the best text really was, the merit of the
different readings being sometimes almost equal, or very nearly
balanced; and, were he to endeavour to get out of the difficulty by
obtaining the judgments of literary men, or even of contemporary poets,
he would find that their opinions would in most cases be dissimilar, if
they did not openly conflict. Those who cannot come to a final decision
as to their own text would not be likely to agree as to the merits of
particular readings in the poems of their predecessors. Unanimity of
opinion on this point is indeed quite unattainable.

Nevertheless, it would be easy for an editor to show the unfortunate
result of keeping rigorously either to the latest or to the earliest
text of Wordsworth. If, on the one hand, the latest were taken, it could
be shown that many of the changes introduced into it were for the worse,
and some of them very decidedly so. For example, in the poem 'To a
Skylark'--composed in 1825--the second verse, retained in the
editions of 1827, 1832, 1836, and 1843, was unaccountably dropped out in
the editions of 1845 and 1849. The following is the complete poem of
1825, as published in 1827.


  Ethereal Minstrel! Pilgrim of the sky!
  Dost thou despise the earth where cares abound?
  Or, while the wings aspire, are heart and eye
  Both with thy nest upon the dewy ground?
  Thy nest which thou canst drop into at will,
  Those quivering wings composed, that music still!

  To the last point of vision, and beyond,
  Mount, daring Warbler! that love-prompted strain,
  ('Twixt thee and thine a never-failing bond)
  Thrills not the less the bosom of the plain:
  Yet might'st thou seem, proud privilege! to sing
  All independent of the leafy spring.

  Leave to the Nightingale her shady wood;
  A privacy of glorious light is thine;
  Whence thou dost pour upon the world a flood
  Of harmony, with rapture more divine;
  Type of the wise who soar, but never roam;
  True to the kindred points of Heaven and Home!


There is no doubt that the first and third stanzas are the finest, and
some may respect the judgment that cut down the Poem by the removal of
its second verse: but others will say, if it was right that such a verse
should be removed, why were many others of questionable merit allowed to
remain? Why was such a poem as 'The Glowworm', of the edition of 1807,
never republished; while 'The Waterfall and the Eglantine', and 'To the
Spade of a Friend', were retained? To give one other illustration, where
a score are possible. In the sonnet, belonging to the year 1807,
beginning:

  "Beloved Vale!" I said, "when I shall con,"

we find, in the latest text, the lines--first adopted in 1827:

  I stood, of simple shame the blushing Thrall;
  So narrow seemed the brooks, the fields so small,

while the early edition of 1807 contains the far happier lines:

  To see the Trees, which I had thought so tall,
  Mere dwarfs; the Brooks so narrow, Fields so small.

On the other hand, if the earliest text be invariably retained, some of
the best poems will be spoiled (or the improvements lost), since
Wordsworth did usually alter for the better. For example, few persons
will doubt that the form in which the second stanza of the poem 'To the
Cuckoo' (written in 1802) appeared in 1845, is an improvement on all its
predecessors. I give the readings of 1807, 1815, 1820, 1827, and 1845.


  While I am lying on the grass,
  I hear thy restless shout:
  From hill to hill it seems to pass,
  About, and all about!                        1807.

  While I am lying on the grass,
  Thy loud note smites my ear!--
  From hill to hill it seems to pass,
  At once far off and near!                    1815.

  While I am lying on the grass,
  Thy loud note smites my ear!
  It seems to fill the whole air's space,
  At once far off and near.                    1820.

  While I am lying on the grass
  Thy twofold shout I hear,
  That seems to fill the whole air's space,
  As loud far off as near.                     1827.

  While I am lying on the grass
  Thy twofold shout I hear,
  From hill to hill it seems to pass,
  At once far off, and near.                   1845.


Similarly, in each of the three poems 'To the Daisy', composed in 1802,
and in the 'Afterthought, to the Duddon', the alterations introduced
into the latest editions were all improvements upon the early version.

It might be urged that these considerations would warrant the
interference of an editor, and justify him in selecting the text which
he thought the best upon the whole; but this must be left to posterity.
When editors can escape the bias of contemporary thought and feeling,
when their judgments are refined by distance and mellowed by the new
literary standards of the intervening years,--when in fact Wordsworth is
as far away from his critics as Shakespeare now is--it may be possible
to adjust a final text. But the task is beyond the power of the present
generation.

It may farther be urged that if this reasoning be valid,--and if, for
the present, one text must be retained uniformly throughout,--the
natural plan is to take the earliest, and not the latest; and this has
some recommendations. It seems more simple, more natural, and certainly
the easiest. We have a natural sequence, if we begin with the earliest
and go on to the latest readings. Then, all the readers of Wordsworth,
who care to possess or to consult the present edition, will doubtless
possess one or other of the complete copies of his works, which contain
his final text; while probably not one in twenty have ever seen the
first edition of any of his poems, with the exception of 'The Prelude'.
It is true that if the reader turns to a footnote to compare the
versions of different years, while he is reading for the sake of the
poetry, he will be so distracted that the effect of the poem as a whole
will be entirely lost; because the critical spirit, which judges of the
text, works apart from the spirit of sympathetic appreciation, in which
all poetry should be read. But it is not necessary to turn to the
footnotes, and to mark what may be called the literary growth of a poem,
while it is being read for its own sake: and these notes are printed in
smaller type, so as not to obtrude themselves on the eye of the reader.

Against the adoption of the earlier text, there is this fatal objection,
that if it is to be done at all, it must be done throughout; and, in the
earliest poems Wordsworth wrote--viz. 'An Evening Walk' and 'Descriptive
Sketches',--the subsequent alterations almost amounted to a cancelling
of the earlier version. His changes were all, or almost all,
unmistakably for the better. Indeed, there was little in these works--in
the form in which they first appeared--to lead to the belief that an
original poet had arisen in England. It is true that Coleridge saw in
them the signs of the dawn of a new era, and wrote thus of 'Descriptive
Sketches', before he knew its author, "Seldom, if ever, was the
emergence of a great and original poetic genius above the literary
horizon more evidently announced." Nevertheless the earliest text of
these 'Sketches' is, in many places, so artificial, prosaic, and dull,
that its reproduction (except as an appendix, or in the form of
footnotes) would be an injustice to Wordsworth. [10] On the other hand,
the passages subsequently cancelled are so numerous, and so long, that
if placed in footnotes the latter would in some instances be more
extensive than the text. The quarto of 1793 will therefore be reprinted
in full as an Appendix to the first volume of this edition. The 'School
Exercise written at Hawkshead' in the poet's fourteenth year, will be
found in vol. viii. Passing over these juvenile efforts, there are
poems--such as 'Guilt and Sorrow', 'Peter Bell', and many others--in
which the earlier text is an inferior one, which was either corrected or
abandoned by Wordsworth in his maturer years. It would be a conspicuous
blunder to print--in the place of honour,--the crude original which was
afterwards repudiated by its author.

It may be remembered, in connection with Wordsworth's text, that he
himself said, "I am for the most part uncertain about my success in
altering poems; but, in this case" (he is speaking of an insertion) "I
am sure I have produced a great improvement." ('Memoirs of Wordsworth',
vol. i. p. 174.) [11] Again, in writing to Mr. Dyce in 1830, "You know
what importance I attach to following strictly the last copy of the text
of an author."

It is also worthy of note that the study of their chronology casts some
light on the changes which the poems underwent. The second edition of
"Lyrical Ballads" appeared in 1800. In that edition the text of 1798 is
scarcely altered: but, in the year in which it was published, Wordsworth
was engrossed with his settlement at Grasmere; and, in the springtime of
creative work, he probably never thought of revising his earlier pieces.
In the year 1800, he composed at least twenty-five new poems. The third
edition of "Lyrical Ballads" appeared in 1802; and during that year he
wrote forty-three new poems, many of them amongst the most perfect of
his Lyrics. His critical instinct had become much more delicate since
1800: and it is not surprising to find--as we do find--that between the
text of the "Lyrical Ballads" of 1800, and that of 1802, there are many
important variations. This is seen, for example, in the way in which he
dealt with 'The Female Vagrant', which is altered throughout. Its early
redundance is pruned away; and, in many instances, the final text,
sanctioned in 1845, had been adopted in 1803. Without going into further
detail, it is sufficient to remark that in the year 1803 Wordsworth's
critical faculty, the faculty of censorship, had developed almost step
for step with the creative originality of his genius. In that prolific
year, when week by week, almost day by day, fresh poems were thrown off
with marvellous facility--as we see from his sister's Journal--he had
become a severe, if not a fastidious, critic of his own earlier work. A
further explanation of the absence of critical revision, in the edition
of 1800, may be found in the fact that during that year Wordsworth was
engaged in writing the "Preface" to his Poems; which dealt, in so
remarkable a manner, with the nature of Poetry in general, and with his
own theory of it in particular.

A further reference to the 'Evening Walk' will illustrate Wordsworth's
way of dealing with his earlier text in his later editions. This Poem
showed from the first a minute observation of Nature--not only in her
external form and colour, but also in her suggestiveness--though not in
her symbolism; and we also find the same transition from Nature to Man,
the same interest in rural life, and the same lingering over its
incidents that we see in his maturer poems. Nevertheless, there is much
that is conventional in the first edition of 'An Evening Walk',
published in 1793. I need only mention, as a sample, the use of the
phrase "silent tides" to describe the waters of a lake. When this poem
was revised, in the year 1815--with a view to its insertion in the first
edition of the collected works--Wordsworth merely omitted large portions
of it, and some of its best passages were struck out. He scarcely
amended the text at all. In 1820, however, he pruned and improved it
throughout; so that between this poem, as recast in 1820 (and reproduced
almost 'verbatim' in the next two editions of 1827 and 1832), and his
happiest descriptions of Nature in his most inspired moods, there is no
great difference. But, in 1836, he altered it still further in detail;
and in that state practically left it, apparently not caring to revise
it further. In the edition of 1845, however, there are several changes.
So far as I can judge, there is one alteration for the worse, and one
only. The reading, in the edition of 1793,

  In these lone vales, if aught of faith may claim,
  Thin silver hairs, and ancient hamlet fame;
  When up the hills, as now, retreats the light,
  Strange apparitions mock the village sight,

is better than that finally adopted,

  In these secluded vales, if village fame,
  Confirmed by hoary hairs, belief may claim;
  When up the hills, as now, retired the light,
  Strange apparitions mocked the shepherd's sight.

It will be seen, however, from the changes made in the text of this
poem, how Wordsworth's observation of Nature developed, how thoroughly
dissatisfied he soon became with everything conventional, and discarded
every image not drawn directly or at first hand from Nature.

The text adopted in the present edition is, for the reasons stated, that
which was finally sanctioned by Wordsworth himself, in the last edition
of his Poems (1849-50). The earlier readings, occurring in previous
editions, are given in footnotes; and it may be desirable to explain the
way in which these are arranged. It will be seen that whenever the text
has been changed a date is given in the footnote, 'before' the other
readings are added. This date, which accompanies the reference number of
the footnote, indicates the year in which the reading finally retained
was first adopted by Wordsworth. The earlier readings then follow, in
chronological order, with the year to which they belong; [12] and it is
in every case to be assumed that the last of the changes indicated was
continued in all subsequent editions of the works. No direct information
is given as to how long a particular reading was retained, or through
how many editions it ran. It is to be assumed, however, that it was
retained in all intermediate editions till the next change of text is
stated. It would encumber the notes with too many figures if, in every
instance in which a change was made, the corresponding state of the text
in all the other editions was indicated. But if no new reading follows
the text quoted, it is to be taken for granted that the reading in
question was continued in every subsequent edition, until the date which
accompanies the reference figure.

Two illustrations will make this clear. The first is a case in which the
text was only altered once, the second an instance in which it was
altered six times. In the 'Evening Walk' the following lines occur--

  The dog, loud barking, 'mid the glittering rocks,
  Hunts, where his master points, the intercepted flocks.

And the footnote is as follows:

                                                  1836.
  That, barking busy 'mid the glittering rocks,
  Hunts, where he points, the intercepted flocks; 1793.

In the light of what has been said above, and by reference to the
Bibliography, it will be seen from these two dates that the original
text of 1793--given in the footnote--was continued in the editions of
1820, 1827, and 1832 (it was omitted from the "extract" of 1815); that
it was changed in the year 1836; and that this reading was retained in
the editions of 1843, 1845, and 1849.

Again, in 'Simon Lee', the lines occur:

  But what to them avails the land
  Which he can till no longer?

And the following are the footnotes:

                                       1845.
  But what avails the land to them,
  Which they can till no longer?       1798.

  "But what," saith he, "avails the land,
  Which I can till no longer?          1827.

  But what avails it now, the land
  Which he can till no longer?         1832.

  'Tis his, but what avails the land
  Which he can till no longer?         1837.

  The time, alas! is come when he
  Can till the land no longer.         1840.

  The time is also come when he
  Can till the land no longer.         C.


From this it will be seen that the text adopted in the first edition of
"Lyrical Ballads" in 1798 was retained in the editions of 1800, 1802,
1805, 1815, and 1820; that it was altered in each of the editions of
1827, 1832, 1837, 1840, as also in the MS. readings in Lord Coleridge's
copy of the works, and in the edition of 1845;  and that the version of
1845 was retained in the edition of 1849-50. It should be added that
when a verse, or stanza, or line--occurring in one or other of the
earlier editions--was omitted from that of 1849, the footnote simply
contains the extract along with the date of the year or years in which
it occurs; and that, in such cases, the date does not follow the
reference number of the footnote, but is placed for obvious reasons at
the end of the extract.

The same thing is true of 'Descriptive Sketches'. In the year 1827,
there were scarcely any alterations made on the text of the poem, as
printed in 1820; still fewer were added in 1832; but for the edition of
1836 the whole was virtually rewritten, and in that state it was finally
left, although a few significant changes were made in 1845.

Slight changes of spelling which occur in the successive editions, are
not mentioned. When, however, the change is one of transposition,
although the text remains unaltered,--as is largely the case in 'Simon
Lee', for example--it is always indicated.

It will be further observed that, at the beginning of every poem, two
dates are given; the first, on the left-hand side, is the date of
composition; the second, on the right-hand side, is the date of the
first publication. In what class the poem first appeared, and the
changes (if any) which subsequently occurred in its title, are mentioned
in the note appended.


THIRD. In the present edition several suggested changes of text, which
were written by Wordsworth on the margin of a copy of his edition of
1836-7, which he kept beside him at Rydal Mount, are published. These
MS. notes seem to have been written by himself, or dictated to others,
at intervals between the years 1836 and 1850, and they are thus a record
of passing thoughts, or "moods of his own mind," during these years.
Some of these were afterwards introduced into the editions of 1842,
1846, and 1849; others were not made use of. The latter have now a value
of their own, as indicating certain new phases of thought and feeling,
in Wordsworth's later years. I owe my knowledge of them, and the
permission to use them, to the kindness of the late Chief Justice of
England, Lord Coleridge. The following is an extract from a letter from
him:


  "FOX GHYLL, AMBLESIDE, '4th October 1881'.

  "I have been long intending to write you as to the manuscript notes
  and alterations in Wordsworth's poems, which you have had the
  opportunity of seeing, and, so far as you thought fit, of using for
  your edition. They came into my possession in this way. I saw them
  advertised in a catalogue which was sent me, and at my request the
  book was very courteously forwarded to me for my inspection. It
  appeared to me of sufficient interest and value to induce me to buy
  it; and I accordingly became the purchaser.

  "It is a copy of the edition in six volumes, the publication of which
  began in the year 1836; and of the volume containing the collected
  sonnets, which was afterwards printed uniformly with that edition. It
  appears to have been the copy which Wordsworth himself used for
  correcting, altering, and adding to the poems contained in it. As you
  have seen, in some of the poems the Alterations are very large,
  amounting sometimes to a complete rewriting of considerable passages.
  Many of these alterations have been printed in subsequent editions;
  some have not; two or three small poems, as far as I know, have not
  been hitherto published. Much of the writing is Wordsworth's own; but
  perhaps the larger portion is the hand-writing of others, one or more,
  not familiar to me as Wordsworth's is.

  "How the volumes came to be sold I do not know.... Such as they are,
  and whatever be their interest or value, you are, as far as I am
  concerned, heartily welcome to them; and I shall be glad indeed if
  they add in the least degree to make your edition more worthy of the
  great man for whom my admiration grows every day I live, and my deep
  gratitude to whom will cease only with my life, and my reason."


This precious copy of the edition of 1836-7 is now the property of Lady
Coleridge. I re-examined it in 1894, and added several readings, which I
had omitted to note twelve years ago, when Lord Coleridge first showed
it to me. I should add that, since the issue of the volumes of 1882-6,
many other MS. copies of individual Poems have come under my notice; and
that every important variation of text in them is incorporated in this
edition.

As it is impossible to discover the precise year in which the suggested
alterations of text were written by Wordsworth, on the margin of the
edition of 1836, they will be indicated, wherever they occur, by the
initial letter C. Comparatively few changes occur in the poems of early
years.

A copy of the 1814 (quarto) edition of 'The Excursion', now in the
possession of a grandson of the poet, the Rev. John Wordsworth, Gosforth
Rectory, Cumberland--which was the copy Wordsworth kept at Rydal Mount
for annotation and correction, much in the same way as he kept the
edition of 1836-7--has also been kindly sent to me by its present owner,
for examination and use in this edition; and, in it, I have found some
additional readings.


FOURTH. In the present edition all the Notes and Memoranda, explanatory
of the Poems, which Wordsworth dictated to Miss Fenwick, are given in
full. Miss Fenwick lived much at Rydal Mount, during the later years of
the Poet's life; and it is to their friendship, and to her inducing
Wordsworth to dictate these Notes, that we owe most of the information
we possess, as to the occasions and circumstances under which his poems
were composed. These notes were first made use of--although only in a
fragmentary manner--by the late Bishop of Lincoln, in the 'Memoirs' of
his uncle. They were afterwards incorporated in full in the edition of
1857, issued by Mr. Moxon, under the direction of Mr. Carter; and in the
centenary edition. They were subsequently printed in 'The Prose Works of
Wordsworth', edited by Dr. Grosart; and in my edition of 1882-6. I am
uncertain whether it was the original MS., written by Miss Fenwick, or
the copy of it afterwards taken for Miss Quillinan, to which Dr. Grosart
had access. The text of these Notes, as printed in the edition of 1857,
is certainly (in very many cases) widely different from what is given in
'The Prose Works' of 1876. I have made many corrections--from the MS.
which I have examined with care--of errors which exist in all previously
printed copies of these Notes, including my own.

What appears in this volume is printed from a MS., which Miss Quillinan
gave me to examine and copy, and which she assured me was the original
one. The proper place for these Fenwick Notes is doubtless that which
was assigned to them by the editor of 1857, viz. before the poems which
they respectively illustrate.


FIFTH. Topographical Notes, explanatory of the allusions made by
Wordsworth to the localities in the English Lake District, and
elsewhere, are added throughout the volumes. This has already been
attempted to some extent by several writers, but a good deal more
remains to be done; and I may repeat what I wrote on this subject, in
1878.

Many of Wordsworth's allusions to Place are obscure, and the exact
localities difficult to identify. It is doubtful if he cared whether
they could be afterwards traced out or not; and in reference to one
particular rock, referred to in the "Poems on the Naming of Places,"
when asked by a friend to localise it, he declined; replying to the
question, "Yes, that--or any other that will suit!" There is no doubt
that, in many instances, his allusions to place are intentionally vague;
and, in some of his most realistic passages, he avowedly weaves together
a description of localities remote from each other.

It is true that "Poems of Places" are not meant to be photographs; and
were they simply to reproduce the features of a particular district, and
be an exact transcript of reality, they would be literary photographs,
and not poems. Poetry cannot, in the nature of things, be a mere
register of phenomena appealing to the eye or the ear. No imaginative
writer, however, in the whole range of English Literature, is so
peculiarly identified with locality as Wordsworth is; and there is not
one on the roll of poets, the appreciation of whose writings is more
aided by an intimate knowledge of the district in which he lived. The
wish to be able to identify his allusions to those places, which he so
specially interpreted, is natural to every one who has ever felt the
spell of his genius; and it is indispensable to all who would know the
special charm of a region, which he described as "a national property,"
and of which he, beyond all other men, may be said to have effected the
literary "conveyance" to posterity.

But it has been asked--and will doubtless be asked again--what is the
use of a minute identification of all these places? Is not the general
fact that Wordsworth described this district of mountain, vale, and
mere, sufficient, without any further attempt at localisation? The
question is more important, and has wider bearings, than appears upon
the surface.

It must be admitted, on the one hand, that the discovery of the precise
point in every local allusion is not necessary to an understanding or
appreciation of the Poems. But, it must be remembered, on the other
hand, that Wordsworth was never contented with simply copying what he
saw in Nature. Of the 'Evening Walk'--written in his eighteenth year--he
says that the plan of the poem

  "has not been confined to a particular walk or an individual place; a
  proof (of which I was unconscious at the time) of my unwillingness to
  submit the poetic spirit to the chains of fact and real circumstance.
  The country is idealised rather than described in any one of its local
  aspects."[13]

Again, he says of the 'Lines written while Sailing in a Boat at Evening':

  "It was during a solitary walk on the banks of the Cam that I was
  first struck with this appearance, and applied it to my own feelings
  in the manner here expressed, changing the scene to the Thames, near
  Windsor"; [14]

and of 'Guilt and Sorrow', he said,

  "To obviate some distraction in the minds of those who are well
  acquainted with Salisbury Plain, it may be proper to say, that of the
  features described as belonging to it, one or two are taken from other
  desolate parts of England." [15]

In 'The Excursion' he passes from Langdale to Grasmere, over to
Patterdale, back to Grasmere, and again to Hawes Water, without warning;
and even in the case of the "Duddon Sonnets" he introduces a description
taken direct from Rydal. Mr. Aubrey de Vere tells of a conversation he
had with Wordsworth, in which he vehemently condemned the
ultra-realistic poet, who goes to Nature with

  "pencil and note-book, and jots down whatever strikes him most,"
  adding, "Nature does not permit an inventory to be made of her charms!
  He should have left his pencil and note-book at home; fixed his eye as
  he walked with a reverent attention on all that surrounded him, and
  taken all into a heart that could understand and enjoy. Afterwards he
  would have discovered that while much of what he had admired was
  preserved to him, much was also most wisely obliterated. _That which
  remained, the picture surviving in his mind, would have presented the
  ideal and essential truth of the scene, and done so in large part by
  discarding much which, though in itself striking, was not
  characteristic._ In every scene, many of the most brilliant details
  are but accidental."

The two last sentences of this extract give admirable expression to one
feature of Wordsworth's interpretation of Nature. In the deepest poetry,
as in the loftiest music,--in Wordsworth's lyrics as in Beethoven's
sonatas--it is by what they unerringly suggest and not by what they
exhaustively express that their truth and power are known. "In what he
leaves unsaid," wrote Schiller, "I discover the master of style." It
depends, no doubt, upon the vision of the "inward eye," and the
reproductive power of the idealising mind, whether the result is a
travesty of Nature, or the embodiment of a truth higher than Nature
yields. On the other hand, it is equally certain that the identification
of localities casts a sudden light in many instances upon obscure
passages in a poem, and is by far the best commentary that can be given.
It is much to be able to compare the actual scene, with the ideal
creation suggested by it; as the latter was both Wordsworth's reading of
the text of Nature, and his interpretation of it. In his seventy-third
year, he said, looking back on his 'Evening Walk', that there was not an
image in the poem which he had not observed, and that he "recollected
the time and place where most of them were noted." In the Fenwick notes,
we constantly find him saying, "the fact occurred strictly as recorded,"
"the fact was as mentioned in the poem"; and the fact very often
involved the accessories of place.

Any one who has tried to trace out the allusions in the "Poems on the
Naming of Places," or to discover the site of "Michael's Sheepfold," to
identify "Ghimmer Crag," or "Thurston-Mere,"--not to speak of the
individual "rocks" and "recesses" near Blea Tarn at the head of Little
Langdale so minutely described in 'The Excursion',--will admit that
local commentary is an important aid to the understanding of Wordsworth.
If to read the 'Yew Trees' in Borrowdale itself,

  in mute repose
  To lie, and listen to the mountain flood
  Murmuring from Glaramara's inmost caves,

to read 'The Brothers' in Ennerdale, or "The Daffodils" by the shore of
Ullswater, gives a new significance to these "poems of the imagination,"
a discovery of the obscurer allusions to place or scene will deepen our
appreciation of those passages in which his idealism is most pronounced.
Every one knows Kirkstone Pass, Aira Force, Dungeon Ghyll, the Wishing
Gate, and Helm Crag: many persons know the Glowworm Rock, and used to
know the Rock of Names; but where is "Emma's Dell"? or "the meeting
point of two highways," so characteristically described in the twelfth
book of 'The Prelude'? and who will fix the site of the pool in Rydal
Upper Park, immortalised in the poem 'To M. H.'? or identify "Joanna's
Rock"? Many of the places in the English Lake District are undergoing
change, and every year the local allusions will be more difficult to
trace. Perhaps the most interesting memorial of the poet which existed,
viz. the "Rock of Names," on the shore of Thirlmere, is now sunk under
the waters of a Manchester reservoir. Other memorials are perishing by
the wear and tear of time, the decay of old buildings, the alteration of
roads, the cutting down of trees, and the modernising, or "improving,"
of the district generally. All this is inevitable. But it is well that
many of the natural objects, over and around which the light of
Wordsworth's genius lingers, are out of the reach of "improvements," and
are indestructible even by machinery.

If it be objected that several of the places which we try to
identify--and which some would prefer to leave for ever undisturbed in
the realm of imagination--were purposely left obscure, it may be
replied that Death and Time have probably now removed all reasons for
reticence, especially in the case of those poems referring to domestic
life and friendly ties. While an author is alive, or while those are
alive to whom he has made reference in the course of his allusions to
place, it may even be right that works designed for posterity should not
be dealt with after the fashion of the modern "interviewer." But
greatness has its penalties; and a "fierce light" "beats around the
throne" of Genius, as well as round that of Empire. Moreover, all
experience shows that posterity takes a great and a growing interest in
exact topographical illustrations of the works of great authors. The
labour recently bestowed upon the places connected with Shakespeare,
Scott, and Burns sufficiently attests this.

The localities in Westmoreland, which are most permanently associated
with Wordsworth, are these: Grasmere, where he lived during the years of
his "poetic prime," and where he is buried; Lower Easdale, where he
passed so many days with his sister by the side of the brook, and on the
terraces at Lancrigg, and where 'The Prelude' was dictated; Rydal Mount,
where he spent the latter half of his life, and where he found one of
the most perfect retreats in England; Great Langdale, and Blea Tarn at
the head of Little Langdale, immortalised in 'The Excursion'; the upper
end of Ullswater, and Kirkstone Pass; and all the mountain tracks and
paths round Grasmere and Rydal, especially the old upper road between
them, under Nab Scar, his favourite walk during his later years, where
he "composed hundreds of verses." There is scarcely a rock or mountain
summit, a stream or tarn, or even a well, a grove, or forest-side in all
that neighbourhood, which is not imperishably identified with this poet,
who at once interpreted them as they had never been interpreted before,
and added

                  the gleam,
  The light that never was, on sea or land,
  The consecration, and the Poet's dream.

It may be worthy of note that Wordsworth himself sanctioned the
principle of tracing out local allusions both by dictating the Fenwick
notes, and by republishing his Essay on the topography of the Lakes,
along with the Duddon Sonnets, in 1820--and also, by itself, in
1822--"from a belief that it would tend materially to illustrate" his
poems.

In this edition the topographical Notes usually follow the Poems to
which they refer. But in the case of the longer Poems, such as 'The
Prelude', 'The Excursion', and others, it seems more convenient to print
them at the foot of the page, than to oblige the reader to turn to the
end of the volume.

From the accident of my having tried long ago--at Principal Shairp's
request--to do what he told me he wished to do, but had failed to carry
out, I have been supposed, quite erroneously, to be an 'authority' on
the subject of "The English Lake District, as interpreted in the Poems
of Wordsworth." The latter, it is true, is the title of one of the books
which I have written about Wordsworth: but, although I visited the Lakes
in 1860,--"as a pilgrim resolute"--and have re-visited the district
nearly every year for more than a quarter of a century, I may say that I
have only a partial knowledge of it. Others, such as Canon Rawnsley, Mr.
Harry Goodwin, and Mr. Rix, for example, know many parts of it much
better than I do; but, as I have often had to compare my own judgment
with that of such experts as the late Dr. Cradock, Principal of
Brasenose College, Oxford, and others, I may add that, when I differ
from them, it has been only after a re-examination of their evidence, at
the localities themselves.


SIXTH. Several Poems, and fragments of poems, hitherto unpublished--or
published in stray quarters, and in desultory fashion--will find a place
in this edition; but I reserve these fragments, and place them all
together, in an Appendix to the last volume of the "Poetical Works." If
it is desirable to print these poems, in such an edition as this, it is
equally desirable to separate them from those which Wordsworth himself
sanctioned in his final edition of 1849-50.

Every great author in the Literature of the World--whether he lives to
old age (when his judgment may possibly be less critical) or dies young
(when it may be relatively more accurate)--should himself determine what
portions of his work ought, and what ought not to survive. At the same
time,--while I do not presume to judge in the case of writers whom I
know less fully than I happen to know Wordsworth and his
contemporaries,--it seems clear that the very greatest men have
occasionally erred as to what parts of their writings might, with most
advantage, survive; and that they have even more frequently erred as to
what MS. letters, etc.,--casting light on their contemporaries--should,
or should not, be preserved. I am convinced, for example, that if the
Wordsworth household had not destroyed all the letters which Coleridge
sent to them, in the first decade of this century, the world would now
possess much important knowledge which is for ever lost. It may have
been wise, for reasons now unknown, to burn those letters, written by
Coleridge: but the students of the literature of the period would gladly
have them now.

Passing from the question of the preservation of Letters, it is evident
that Wordsworth was very careful in distinguishing between the Verses
which he sent to Newspapers and Magazines, and those Poems which he
included in his published volumes. His anxiety on this point may be
inferred from the way in which he more than once emphasised the fact of
republication, e.g. in 'Peter Bell' (1819) he put the following
prefatory note to four sonnets, which had previously appeared in
'Blackwood's Magazine', and which afterwards (1828) appeared in the
'Poetical Album' of Alaric Watts, "The following Sonnets having lately
appeared in Periodical Publications are here reprinted."

Some of the poems (or fragments of poems), included in the 'addenda' to
Volume viii. of this edition, I would willingly have left out
(especially the sonnet addressed to Miss Maria Williams); but, since
they have appeared elsewhere, I feel justified in now reprinting even
that trivial youthful effusion, signed "Axiologus." I rejoice, however,
that there is no likelihood that the "Somersetshire Tragedy" will ever
see the light. When I told Wordsworth's successor in the Laureateship
that I had burned a copy of that poem, sent to me by one to whom it had
been confided, his delight was great. It is the chronicle of a revolting
crime, with nothing in the verse to warrant its publication. The only
curious thing about it is that Wordsworth wrote it. With this exception,
there is no reason why the fragments which he did not himself republish,
and others which he published but afterwards suppressed, should not now
be printed. The suppression of some of these by the poet himself is as
unaccountable, as is his omission of certain stanzas in the earlier
poems from their later versions. Even the Cambridge 'Installation Ode',
which is so feeble, will be reprinted. [16] 'The Glowworm', which only
appeared in the edition of 1807, will be republished in full. 'Andrew
Jones',--also suppressed after appearing in "Lyrical Ballads" of 1800,
1802, and 1805,--will be replaced, in like manner. The youthful 'School
Exercise' written at Hawkshead, the translation from the 'Georgics' of
Virgil, the poem addressed 'To the Queen' in 1846, will appear in their
chronological place in vol. viii. There are also a translation of some
French stanzas by Francis Wrangham on 'The Birth of Love'-a poem
entitled 'The Eagle and the Dove', which was privately printed in a
volume, consisting chiefly of French fragments, and called 'La petite
Chouannerie, ou Historie d'un College Breton sous l'Empire'--a sonnet on
the rebuilding of a church at Cardiff--an Election Squib written during
the Lowther and Brougham contest for the representation of the county of
Cumberland in 1818--some stanzas written in the Visitors' Book at the
Ferry, Windermere, and other fragments. Then, since Wordsworth published
some verses by his sister Dorothy in his own volumes, other unpublished
fragments by Miss Wordsworth may find a place in this edition. I do not
attach much importance, however, to the recovery of these unpublished
poems. The truth is, as Sir Henry Taylor--himself a poet and critic of
no mean order--remarked [17],

  "In these days, when a great man's path to posterity is likely to be
  more and more crowded, there is a tendency to create an obstruction,
  in the desire to give an impulse. To gather about a man's work all the
  details that can be found out about it is, in my opinion, to put a
  drag upon it; and, as of the Works, so of the Life."

The industrious labour of some editors in disinterring the trivial works
of great men is not a commendable industry. All great writers have
occasionally written trifles--this is true even of Shakespeare--and if
they wished them to perish, why should we seek to resuscitate them?
Besides, this labour--whether due to the industry of admiring friends,
or to the ambition of the literary resurrectionist--is futile; because
the verdict of Time is sure, and posterity is certain to consign the
recovered trivialities to kindly oblivion. The question which should
invariably present itself to the editor of the fragments of a great
writer is, "_Can these bones live_?" If they cannot, they had better
never see the light. Indeed the only good reason for reprinting the
fragments which have been lost (because the author himself attached no
value to them), is that, in a complete collection of the works of a
great man, some of them may have a biographic or psychological value.
But have we any right to reproduce, from an antiquarian motive, what--in
a literary sense--is either trivial, or feeble, or sterile?

We must, however, distinguish between what is suitable for an edition
meant either to popularise an author, or to interpret him, and an
edition intended to bring together all that is worthy of preservation
for posterity. There is great truth in what Mr. Arnold has lately said
of Byron:

  "I question whether by reading everything which he gives us, we are so
  likely to acquire an admiring sense, even of his variety and
  abundance, as by reading what he gives us at his happier moments.
  Receive him absolutely without omission and compromise, follow his
  whole outpouring, stanza by stanza, and line by line, from the very
  commencement to the very end, and he is capable of being tiresome."
  [18]

This is quite true; nevertheless, English literature demands a complete
edition of all the works of Byron: and it may be safely predicted that,
for weightier reasons and with greater urgency, it will continue to call
for the collected works of Wordsworth.

It should also be noted that the fact of Wordsworth's having dictated to
Miss Fenwick (so late as 1843) a stanza from 'The Convict' in his note
to 'The Lament of Mary Queen of Scots' (1817), justifies the inclusion
of the whole of that (suppressed) poem in such an edition as this.

The fact that Wordsworth did not republish all his Poems, in his final
edition of 1849-50, is not conclusive evidence that he thought them
unworthy of preservation, and reproduction. It must be remembered that
'The Prelude' itself was a posthumous publication; and also that the
fragmentary canto of 'The Recluse', entitled "Home at Grasmere"--as well
as the other canto published in 1886, and entitled (most prosaically)
"Composed when a probability existed of our being obliged to quit Rydal
Mount as a residence"--were not published by the poet himself. I am of
opinion that his omission of the stanzas beginning:

  Among all lovely things my Love had been,

and of the sonnet on his 'Voyage down the Rhine', was due to sheer
forgetfulness of their existence. Few poets remember all their past,
fugitive, productions. At the same time, there are other
fragments,--written when he was experimenting with his theme, and when
the inspiration of genius had forsaken him,--which it is unfortunate
that he did not himself destroy.

Among the Poems which Wordsworth suppressed, in his final edition, is
the Latin translation of 'The Somnambulist' by his son. This will be
republished, more especially as it was included by Wordsworth himself in
the second edition of his "Yarrow Revisited."

It may be well to mention the 'repetitions' which are inevitable in this
edition,

(1) As already explained, those fragments of 'The Recluse'--which were
issued in all the earlier volumes, and afterwards incorporated in 'The
Prelude'--are printed as they originally appeared.

(2) Short Notes are extracted from Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections
of a Tour made in Scotland' (1803), which illustrate the Poems composed
during that Tour, while the whole text of that Tour will be printed in
full in subsequent volumes.

(3) Other fragments, including the lines beginning,

  Wisdom and Spirit of the universe,

will be printed both by themselves in their chronological place, and in
the longer poem of which they form a part, according to the original
plan of their author.

A detail, perhaps not too trivial to mention, is that, in this
edition--at the suggestion of several friends--I have followed the
example of Professor Dowden in his Aldine edition, and numbered the
lines of almost all the poems--even the sonnets. When I have not done
so, the reason will be obvious; viz. either the structure, or the
brevity, of the poem. [19]

In giving the date of each poem, I have used the word "composed," rather
than "written," very much because Wordsworth himself,--and his sister,
in her Journals--almost invariably use the word "composed"; although he
criticised the term as applied to the creation of a poem, as if it were
a manufactured article. In his Chronological Table, Mr. Dowden adopts
the word "composed"; but, in his edition of the Poems, he has made use
of the term" written." [20]

No notice (or almost none) of misprints in Wordsworth's own text is
taken, in the notes to this edition. Sometimes an error occurred, and
was carried on through more than one edition, and corrected in the next:
e.g., in 'The Childless Father', the editions of 1827, 1832, and 1836
have the line:

  Fresh springs of green boxwood, not six months before.

In the 'errata' of the edition of 1836 this is corrected to "fresh
sprigs." There are other 'errata', which remained in the edition of
1849-50, e.g., in 'Rob Roy's Grave', "Vools" for "Veols," and mistakes
in quotations from other poets, such as "invention" for "instruction,"
in Wither's poem on the Daisy. These are corrected without mention.

I should perhaps add that, while I have included, amongst the
illustrative notes, extracts from Henry Crabb Robinson's 'Diary', etc.,
many of them are now published for the first time. These voluminous MSS.
of Robinson's have been re-examined with care; and the reader who
compares the three volumes of the 'Diary', etc.--edited by Dr.
Sadler--with the extracts now printed from the original MS., will see
where sentences omitted by the original editor have been included.

As this edition proceeds, my debt to many--who have been so kind as to
put their Wordsworth MSS. and memoranda at my disposal--will be
apparent.

It is difficult to acknowledge duly my obligation to collectors of
autograph Letters--Mr. Morrison, the late Mr. Locker Lampson, the late
Mr. Mackay, of the Grange, Trowbridge, and a score of others--but, I
may say in general, that the kindness of those who possess Wordsworth
MSS. in allowing me to examine them, has been a very genuine evidence of
their interest in the Poet, and his work.

My special thanks are due to Mr. Gordon Wordsworth, who has, in the
kindest manner and for many years, placed everything at my disposal,
which could further my labour on his grandfather's Works.

Finally, I wish to express the great debt I owe to the late Mr. J. Dykes
Campbell, for many suggestions, and for his unwearied interest in this
work,--which I think was second only to his interest in Coleridge--and
also to Mr. W. B. Kinghorn for his valuable assistance in the revision
of proof sheets.

If there are any desiderata, in reference to Wordsworth--in addition to
a new Life, a critical Essay, and such a Bibliography of Criticism as
will be adequate for posterity--a 'Concordance' to his works is one of
them. A correspondent once offered to prepare this for me, if I found a
publisher: and another has undertaken to compile a volume of 'parallel
passages' from the earlier poets of England, and of the world. A
Concordance might very well form part of a volume of 'Wordsworthiana',
and be a real service to future students of the poet.

William Knight.



[Footnote 1: In addition to my own detection of errors in the text and
notes to the editions 1882-9, I acknowledge special obligation to the
late Vice-Chancellor of the Victoria University, Principal Greenwood,
who went over every volume with laborious care, and sent me the result.
To the late Mr. J. Dykes Campbell, to Mr. J. R. Tutin, to the Rev.
Thomas Hutchinson of Kimbolton, and to many others, I am similarly
indebted.]


[Footnote 2: See 'Memoirs of William Wordsworth', ii. pp. 113, 114.]


[Footnote 3: It is however different with the fragments which were
published in all the editions issued in the poet's lifetime, and
afterwards in 'The Prelude', such as the lines on "the immortal boy" of
Windermere. These are printed in their chronological place, and also in
the posthumous poem.]


[Footnote 4: 'Poems of Wordsworth selected and arranged by Matthew
Arnold'. London: Macmillan and Co.]


[Footnote 5: See the 'Life of Sir W. Rowan Hamilton', vol. ii. pp, 132,
135.]


[Footnote 6: See the Preface to the American edition of 1837.]


[Footnote 7: It need hardly be explained that, in the case of a modern
poet, these various readings are not like the conjectural guesses of
critics and commentators as to what the original text was (as in the
case of the Greek Poets, or of Dante, or even of Shakespeare). They are
the actual alterations, introduced deliberately as improvements, by the
hand of the poet himself.]


[Footnote 8: The collection in the British Museum, and those in all the
University Libraries of the country, are incomplete.]


[Footnote 9: The publication of this edition was superintended by Mr.
Carter, who acted as Wordsworth's secretary for thirty-seven years, and
was appointed one of his literary executors.]


[Footnote 10: Let the indiscriminate admirer of "first editions" turn to
this quarto, and perhaps even he may wonder why it has been rescued from
oblivion. I am only aware of the existence of five copies of the edition
of 1793; and although it has a certain autobiographic value, I do not
think that many who read it once will return to it again, except as a
literary curiosity. Here--and not in "Lyrical Ballads" or 'The
Excursion'--was the quarry where Jeffrey or Gifford might have found
abundant material for criticism.]


[Footnote 11: It is unfortunate that the 'Memoirs' do not tell us to
what poem the remark applies, or to whom the letter containing it was
addressed.]


[Footnote 12: It is important to note that the printed text in several
of the editions is occasionally cancelled in the list of 'errata', at
the beginning or the end of the volume: also that many copies of the
early editions (notably those of 1800), were bound up without the full
'errata' list. In this edition there were two such lists, one of them
very brief. But the cancelled words in these 'errata' lists, must be
taken into account, in determining the text of each edition.]


[Footnote 13: I. F. note. See vol. i. p. 5.]


[Footnote 14: I. F. note. See vol. i. p. 32.]


[Footnote 15: Advertisement. See vol. i. p. 78.]


[Footnote 16: How much of this poem was Wordsworth's own has not been
definitely ascertained. I am of opinion that very little, if any of it,
was his. It has been said that his nephew, the late Bishop of Lincoln,
wrote most of it; but more recent evidence tends to show that it was the
work of his son-in-law, Edward Quillinan.]


[Footnote 17: In a letter to the writer in 1882.]


[Footnote 18: 'The Poetry of Byron, chosen and arranged by Matthew
Arnold'. London: Macmillan and Co.]


[Footnote 19: It may not be too trivial a fact to mention that
Wordsworth numbered the lines of his earliest publication, 'An Evening
Walk, in 1793.--Ed.]


[Footnote 20: Another fact, not too trivial to mention, is that in the
original MS. of the 'Lines composed at Grasmere', etc., Wordsworth sent
it to the printer "Lines written," but changed it in proof to "Lines
composed."--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





EXTRACT FROM THE CONCLUSION OF A POEM, COMPOSED IN ANTICIPATION OF
LEAVING SCHOOL

Composed 1786.--Published 1815

This poem was placed by Wordsworth among his "Juvenile Pieces." The
following note was prefixed to that Series, from 1820 to 1832:

  "Of the Poems in this class, "THE EVENING WALK" and "DESCRIPTIVE
  SKETCHES" were first published in 1793. They are reprinted with some
  unimportant alterations that were chiefly made very soon after their
  publication. It would have been easy to amend them, in many passages,
  both as to sentiment and expression, and I have not been altogether
  able to resist the temptation: but attempts of this kind are made at
  the risk of injuring those characteristic features, which, after all,
  will be regarded as the principal recommendation of juvenile poems."

In 1836 "unimportant" was erased before "alterations"; and after
"temptation" the following was added, "as will be obvious to the
attentive reader, in some instances: these are few, for I am aware that
attempts of this kind," etc.

  "The above, which was written some time ago, scarcely applies to the
  Poem, 'Descriptive Sketches', as it now stands. The corrections,
  though numerous, are not, however, such as to prevent its retaining
  with propriety a place in the class of 'Juvenile Pieces.'"

In the editions of 1845 and 1849, Wordsworth called his "Juvenile
Pieces," "Poems written in Youth."--Ed.

  ["Dear native regions," etc., 1786, Hawkshead. The beautiful image
  with which this poem concludes suggested itself to me while I was
  resting in a boat along with my companions under the shade of a
  magnificent row of sycamores, which then extended their branches from
  the shore of the promontory upon which stands the ancient, and at that
  time the more picturesque, Hall of Coniston, the Seat of the Le
  Flemings from very early times. The Poem of which it was the
  conclusion, was of many hundred lines, and contained thoughts and
  images, most of which have been dispersed through my other
  writings.--I. F.]

In the editions 1815 to 1832, the title given to this poem was 'Extract
from the conclusion of a Poem, composed upon leaving School'. The row of
sycamores at Hawkshead, referred to in the Fenwick note, no longer
exists.

In the "Autobiographical Memoranda," dictated by Wordsworth at Rydal
Mount in November 1847, he says, " .... I wrote, while yet a schoolboy,
a long poem running upon my own adventures, and the scenery of the
county in which I was brought up. The only part of that poem which has
been preserved is the conclusion of it, which stands at the beginning of
my collected Poems." [A]

In the eighth book of 'The Prelude', (lines 468-475), this fragment is
introduced, and there Wordsworth tells us that once, when boating on
Coniston Lake (Thurston-mere) in his boyhood, he entered under a grove
of trees on its "western marge," and glided "along the line of
low-roofed water," "as in a cloister." He adds,

  while, in that shade
  Loitering, I watched the golden beams of light
  Flung from the setting sun, as they reposed
  In silent beauty on the naked ridge
  Of a high eastern hill--thus flowed my thoughts
  In a pure stream of words fresh from the heart:

Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE POEM


  Dear native regions, [B] I foretell,
  From what I feel at this farewell,
  That, wheresoe'er my steps may [1] tend,
  And whensoe'er my course shall end,

  If in that hour a single tie [2]                                5
  Survive of local sympathy,
  My soul will cast the backward view,
  The longing look alone on you.

  Thus, while the Sun sinks down to rest
  Far in the regions of the west,                                10
  Though to the vale no parting beam
  Be given, not one memorial gleam, [3]
  A lingering light he fondly throws [4]
  On the dear hills [5] where first he rose.



       *       *       *       *       *


[Footnote A: See the 'Memoirs of William Wordsworth', by Christopher
Wordsworth (1851), vol. i. pp. 10-31.--ED]


[Footnote B: Compare the 'Ode, composed in January 1816', stanza
v.--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *


[Variant 1:

1832.

  ....shall 1815.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

  That, when the close of life draws near,
  And I must quit this earthly sphere,
  If in that hour a tender tie            MS.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  Thus, when the Sun, prepared for rest,
  Hath gained the precincts of the West,
  Though his departing radiance fail
  To illuminate the hollow Vale,          1815.

  Thus, from the precincts of the West,
  The Sun, when sinking down to rest,     1832.

  ... while sinking ...                   1836.

  Hath reached the precincts ...            MS.]


[Variant 4:

1815.

  A lingering lustre fondly throws            1832.

The edition of 1845 reverts to the reading of 1815.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  On the dear mountain-tops ...            1820.

The edition of 1845 returns to the text of 1815.]





       *       *       *       *       *





WRITTEN IN VERY EARLY YOUTH


Composed 1786. [A]--Published 1807 [B]


From 1807 to 1843 this was placed by Wordsworth in his group of
"Miscellaneous Sonnets." In 1845, it was transferred to the class of
"Poems written in Youth." It is doubtful if it was really written in
"'very' early youth." Its final form, at any rate, may belong to a later
period.--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *


  Calm is all nature as a resting wheel.
  The kine are couched upon the dewy grass;
  The horse alone, seen dimly as I pass,
  Is cropping audibly [1] his later meal: [C]
  Dark is the ground; a slumber seems to steal                     5
  O'er vale, and mountain, and the starless sky.
  Now, in this blank of things, a harmony,
  Home-felt, and home-created, comes [2] to heal
  That grief for which the senses still supply
  Fresh food; for only then, when memory                          10
  Is hushed, am I at rest. My Friends! restrain
  Those busy cares that would allay my pain;
  Oh! leave me to myself, nor let me feel
  The officious touch that makes me droop again.


      *       *       *       *       *


[Footnote A: The date of the composition of this fragment is quite
unknown.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: But previously, in 'The Morning Post', Feb. 13, 1802.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Canon Ainger calls attention to the fact that there is here
a parallel, possibly a reminiscence, from the 'Nocturnal Reverie' of
the Countess of Winchelsea.

  Whose stealing pace and lengthened shade we fear,
  Till torn-up forage in his teeth we hear.

Ed.]


      *       *       *       *       *

[Variant 1:

1827.

  Is up, and cropping yet ...    1807.]


[Variant 2:

1838.

  ... seems ...                  1807.]





       *       *       *       *       *





AN EVENING WALK

ADDRESSED TO A YOUNG LADY


Composed 1787-9. [A]--Published 1793


  [The young Lady to whom this was addressed was my Sister. It was
  composed at School, and during my first two College vacations. There
  is not an image in it which I have not observed; and, now in my
  seventy-third year, I recollect the time and place, when most of them
  were noticed. I will confine myself to one instance:

    Waving his hat, the shepherd, from the vale,
    Directs his winding dog the cliffs to scale,--
    The dog, loud barking, 'mid the glittering rocks,
    Hunts, where his master points, the intercepted flocks.

  I was an eye-witness of this for the first time while crossing the
  Pass of Dunmail Raise. Upon second thought, I will mention another
  image:

    And, fronting the bright west, yon oak entwines
    Its darkening boughs and leaves, in stronger lines.

  This is feebly and imperfectly expressed, but I recollect distinctly
  the very spot where this first struck me. It was on the way between
  Hawkshead and Ambleside, and gave me extreme pleasure. The moment was
  important in my poetical history; for I date from it my consciousness
  of the infinite variety of natural appearances which had been
  unnoticed by the poets of any age or country, so far as I was
  acquainted with them; and I made a resolution to supply in some degree
  the deficiency. I could not have been at that time above fourteen
  years of age. The description of the swans, that follows, was taken
  from the daily opportunities I had of observing their habits, not as
  confined to the gentleman's park, but in a state of nature. There were
  two pairs of them that divided the lake of Esthwaite, and its
  in-and-out flowing streams, between them, never trespassing a single
  yard upon each other's separate domain. They were of the old
  magnificent species, bearing in beauty and majesty about the same
  relation to the Thames swan which that does to the goose. It was from
  the remembrance of those noble creatures, I took, thirty years after,
  the picture of the swan which I have discarded from the poem of
  'Dion'. [B] While I was a schoolboy, the late Mr. Curwen introduced a
  little fleet of these birds, but of the inferior species, to the lake
  of Windermere. Their principal home was about his own island; but they
  sailed about into remote parts of the lake, and either from real or
  imagined injury done to the adjoining fields, they were got rid of at
  the request of the farmers and proprietors, but to the great regret of
  all who had become attached to them from noticing their beauty and
  quiet habits. I will conclude my notice of this poem by observing that
  the plan of it has not been confined to a particular walk, or an
  individual place; a proof (of which I was unconscious at the time) of
  my unwillingness to submit the poetic spirit to the chains of fact and
  real circumstance. The country is idealised rather than described in
  any one of its local aspects.--I. F.]

The title of this poem, as first published in 1793, was 'An Evening
Walk. An epistle; in verse. Addressed to a Young Lady, from the Lakes of
the North of England. By W. Wordsworth, B.A., of St. John's, Cambridge'.
Extracts from it were published in all the collected editions of the
poems under the general title of "Juvenile Pieces," from 1815 to 1843;
and, in 1845 and 1849, of "Poems written in Youth." The following
prefatory note to the "Juvenile Pieces" occurs in the editions 1820 to
1832.

  "They are reprinted with some unimportant alterations that were
  chiefly made very soon after their publication. It would have been
  easy to amend them, in many passages, both as to sentiment and
  expression, and I have not been altogether able to resist the
  temptation: but attempts of this kind are made at the risk of injuring
  those characteristic features, which, after all, will be regarded as
  the principal recommendation of juvenile poems."

To this, Wordsworth added, in 1836,

  "The above, which was written some time ago, scarcely applies to the
  Poem, 'Descriptive Sketches', as it now stands. The corrections,
  though numerous, are not, however, such as to prevent its retaining
  with propriety a place in the class of 'Juvenile Pieces.'"

In May 1794 Wordsworth wrote to his friend Mathews,

  "It was with great reluctance that I sent these two little works into
  the world in so imperfect a state. But as I had done nothing at the
  University, I thought these little things might show that I _could_ do
  something."

Wordsworth's notes to this poem are printed from the edition of 1793.
Slight variations in the text of these notes in subsequent editions, in
the spelling of proper names, and in punctuation, are not noted.--Ed.

  'General Sketch of the Lakes--Author's regret of his Youth which was
  passed amongst them--Short description of Noon--Cascade--Noon-tide
  Retreat--Precipice and sloping Lights--Face of Nature as the Sun
  declines--Mountain-farm, and the
  Cock--Slate-quarry--Sunset--Superstition of the Country connected with
  that moment--Swans--Female Beggar--Twilight-sounds--Western
  Lights--Spirits--Night--Moonlight--Hope--Night-sounds--Conclusion'.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  Far from my dearest Friend, 'tis mine to rove
  Through bare grey dell, high wood, and pastoral cove;
  Where Derwent rests, and listens to the roar
  That stuns the tremulous cliffs of high Lodore; [1]
  Where peace to Grasmere's lonely island leads,                     5
  To willowy hedge-rows, and to emerald meads;
  Leads to her bridge, rude church, and cottaged grounds,
  Her rocky sheepwalks, and her woodland bounds;
  Where, undisturbed by winds, Winander [C] sleeps [2]
  'Mid clustering isles, and holly-sprinkled steeps;                10
  Where twilight glens endear my Esthwaite's shore,
  And memory of departed pleasures, more.

    Fair scenes, erewhile, I taught, a happy child,
  The echoes of your rocks my carols wild:
  The spirit sought not then, in cherished sadness,                 15
  A cloudy substitute for failing gladness. [3]
  In youth's keen [4] eye the livelong day was bright,
  The sun at morning, and the stars at night,
  Alike, when first the bittern's hollow bill
  Was heard, or woodcocks [D] roamed the moonlight hill. [5]        20

  In thoughtless gaiety I coursed the plain, [6]
  And hope itself was all I knew of pain;
  For then, the inexperienced heart would beat [7]
  At times, while young Content forsook her seat,
  And wild Impatience, pointing upward, showed,                     25
  Through passes yet unreached, a brighter road. [8]
  Alas! the idle tale of man is found
  Depicted in the dial's moral round;
  Hope with reflection blends her social rays [9]
  To gild the total tablet of his days;                             30
  Yet still, the sport of some malignant power,
  He knows but from its shade the present hour.
  [10]
    But why, ungrateful, dwell on idle pain?
  To show what pleasures yet to me remain, [11]
  Say, will my Friend, with unreluctant ear, [12]                   35
  The history of a poet's evening hear?

    When, in the south, the wan noon, brooding still,
  Breathed a pale steam around the glaring hill,
  And shades of deep-embattled clouds were seen,                    40
  Spotting the northern cliffs with lights between;
  When crowding cattle, checked by rails that make
  A fence far stretched into the shallow lake,
  Lashed the cool water with their restless tails,
  Or from high points of rock looked out for fanning gales;[13]     45
  When school-boys stretched their length upon the green;
  And round the broad-spread oak, a glimmering scene,
  In the rough fern-clad park, the herded deer [14]
  Shook the still-twinkling tail and glancing ear;
  When horses in the sunburnt intake [E] stood,                     50
  And vainly eyed below the tempting flood,
  Or tracked the passenger, in mute distress,
  With forward neck the closing gate to press--[15]
  Then, while I wandered where the huddling rill
  Brightens with water-breaks the hollow ghyll [F] [16]             55
  As by enchantment, an obscure retreat [17]
  Opened at once, and stayed my devious feet.
  While thick above the rill the branches close,
  In rocky basin its wild waves repose,
  Inverted shrubs, [G] and moss of gloomy green,                    60
  Cling from the rocks, with pale wood-weeds between;
  And its own twilight softens the whole scene, [H]
  Save where aloft the subtle sunbeams shine
  On withered briars that o'er the crags recline; [18]
  Save where, with sparkling foam, a small cascade,                 65
  Illumines, from within, the leafy shade; [19]
  Beyond, along the vista of the brook,
  Where antique roots its bustling course [20] o'erlook,
  The eye reposes on a secret bridge [J]
  Half grey, half shagged with ivy to its ridge;                    70
  There, bending o'er the stream, the listless swain
  Lingers behind his disappearing wain. [21]
 --Did Sabine grace adorn my living line,
  Blandusia's praise, wild stream, should yield to thine!
  Never shall ruthless minister of death                            75
  'Mid thy soft glooms the glittering steel unsheath;
  No goblets shall, for thee, be crowned with flowers,
  No kid with piteous outcry thrill thy bowers;
  The mystic shapes that by thy margin rove
  A more benignant sacrifice approve--                             80
  A mind, that, in a calm angelic mood
  Of happy wisdom, meditating good,
  Beholds, of all from her high powers required,
  Much done, and much designed, and more desired,--
  Harmonious thoughts, a soul by truth refined,                     85
  Entire affection for all human kind.

    Dear Brook, [22] farewell! To-morrow's noon again
  Shall hide me, wooing long thy wildwood strain;
  But now the sun has gained his western road,
  And eve's mild hour invites my steps abroad.                      90

    While, near the midway cliff, the silvered kite
  In many a whistling circle wheels her flight;
  Slant watery lights, from parting clouds, apace
  Travel along the precipice's base;
  Cheering its naked waste of scattered stone,                      95
  By lichens grey, and scanty moss, o'ergrown;
  Where scarce the foxglove peeps, or [23] thistle's beard;
  And restless [24] stone-chat, all day long, is heard.

    How pleasant, as the sun declines, to view [25]
  The spacious landscape change in form and hue!                   100
  Here, vanish, as in mist, before a flood
  Of bright obscurity, hill, lawn, and wood;
  There, objects, by the searching beams betrayed,
  Come forth, and here retire in purple shade;
  Even the white stems of birch, the cottage white,                105
  Soften their glare before the mellow light;
  The skiffs, at anchor where with umbrage wide
  Yon chestnuts half the latticed boat-house hide,
  Shed from their sides, that face the sun's slant beam,
  Strong flakes of radiance on the tremulous stream:               110
  Raised by yon travelling flock, a dusty cloud
  Mounts from the road, and spreads its moving shroud;
  The shepherd, all involved in wreaths of fire,
  Now shows a shadowy speck, and now is lost entire.

    Into a gradual calm the breezes [26] sink, [27]                115
  A blue rim borders all the lake's still brink;
  There doth the twinkling aspen's foliage sleep,
  And insects clothe, like dust, the glassy deep: [28]
  And now, on every side, the surface breaks
  Into blue spots, and slowly lengthening streaks;                 120
  Here, plots of sparkling water tremble bright
  With thousand thousand twinkling points of light;
  There, waves that, hardly weltering, die away,
  Tip their smooth ridges with a softer ray;
  And now the whole wide lake in deep repose                       125
  Is hushed, and like a burnished mirror glows, [29]
  Save where, along the shady western marge,
  Coasts, with industrious oar, the charcoal barge. [30]

    Their panniered train a group of potters goad,
  Winding from side to side up the steep road;                     130
  The peasant, from yon cliff of fearful edge
  Shot, down the headlong path darts with his sledge; [31]
  Bright beams the lonely mountain-horse illume
  Feeding 'mid purple heath, "green rings," [K] and broom;
  While the sharp slope the slackened team confounds,              135
  Downward [L] the ponderous timber-wain resounds;
  [32] In foamy breaks the rill, with merry song,
  Dashed o'er [33] the rough rock, lightly leaps along;
  From lonesome chapel at the mountain's feet,
  Three humble bells their rustic chime repeat;                    140
  Sounds from the water-side the hammered boat;
  And 'blasted' quarry thunders, heard remote!

    Even here, amid the sweep of endless woods,
  Blue pomp of lakes, high cliffs and falling floods,
  Not undelightful are the simplest charms,                        145
  Found by the grassy [34] door of mountain-farms.

    Sweetly ferocious, [M] round his native walks,
  Pride of [35] his sister-wives, the monarch stalks;
  Spur-clad his nervous feet, and firm his tread;
  A crest of purple tops the warrior's head. [36]                  150
  Bright sparks his black and rolling [37] eye-ball hurls
  Afar, his tail he closes and unfurls;
  [38] On tiptoe reared, he strains [39] his clarion throat,
  Threatened by faintly-answering farms remote:
  Again with his shrill voice the mountain rings,                  155
  While, flapped with conscious pride, resound his wings! [40]

    Where, mixed with graceful birch, the sombrous pine
  And yew-tree [41] o'er the silver rocks recline;
  I love to mark the quarry's moving trains,
  Dwarf panniered steeds, and men, and numerous wains:             160
  How busy all [42] the enormous hive within,
  While Echo dallies with its [43] various din!
  Some (hear you not their chisels' clinking sound?) [44]
  Toil, small as pigmies in the gulf profound;
  Some, dim between the lofty [45] cliffs descried,                165
  O'erwalk the slender [46] plank from side to side;
  These, by the pale-blue rocks that ceaseless ring,
  In airy baskets hanging, work and sing.[47]

    Just where a cloud above the mountain rears [48]
  An [49] edge all flame, the broadening sun appears;              170
  A long blue bar its aegis orb divides,
  And breaks the spreading of its golden tides;
  And now that orb has touched the purple steep
  Whose softened image penetrates the deep.[50]

  'Cross the calm lake's blue shades the cliffs aspire,            175
  With towers and woods, a "prospect all on fire"; [N]
  While [51] coves and secret hollows, through a ray
  Of fainter gold, a purple gleam betray.
  Each slip of lawn the broken rocks between
  Shines in the light with more than earthly green: [52]           180
  Deep yellow beams the scattered stems [53] illume,
  Far in the level forest's central gloom:
  Waving his hat, the shepherd, from [54] the vale,
  Directs his winding dog the cliffs to scale,--
  The dog, loud barking, 'mid the glittering rocks,                185
  Hunts, where his master points, the intercepted flocks. [55]
  Where oaks o'erhang the road the radiance shoots
  On tawny earth, wild weeds, and twisted roots;
  The druid-stones a brightened ring unfold; [56]
  And all the babbling brooks are liquid gold;                     190
  Sunk to a curve, the day-star lessens still,
  Gives one bright glance, and drops [57] behind the hill. [P]

    In these secluded vales, if village fame,
  Confirmed by hoary hairs, belief may claim;
  When up the hills, as now, retired the light,                    195
  Strange apparitions mocked the shepherd's sight. [58]

    The form appears of one that spurs his steed
  Midway along the hill with desperate speed; [59]
  Unhurt pursues his lengthened flight, while all
  Attend, at every stretch, his headlong fall.                     200
  Anon, appears a brave, a gorgeous show
  Of horsemen-shadows moving to and fro; [60]
  At intervals imperial banners stream, [61]
  And now the van reflects the solar beam; [62]
  The rear through iron brown betrays a sullen gleam.              205
  While silent stands the admiring crowd below,
  Silent the visionary warriors go,
  Winding in ordered pomp their upward way [Q]
  Till the last banner of their [63] long array
  Has disappeared, and every trace is fled                         210
  Of splendour--save the beacon's spiry head
  Tipt with eve's latest gleam of burning red. [64]

    Now, while the solemn evening shadows sail,
  On slowly-waving pinions, [65] down the vale;
  And, fronting the bright west, yon oak entwines                  215
  Its darkening boughs and leaves, in stronger lines; [66]
  'Tis pleasant near the tranquil lake to stray [67]
  Where, winding on along some secret bay, [68]
  The swan uplifts his chest, and backward flings
  His neck, a varying arch, between his towering wings:            220
  The eye that marks the gliding creature sees
  How graceful, pride can be, and how majestic, ease. [69]

  While tender cares and mild domestic loves
  With furtive watch pursue her as she moves,
  The female with a meeker charm succeeds,                         225
  And her brown little-ones around her leads,
  Nibbling the water lilies as they pass,
  Or playing wanton with the floating grass.
  She, in a mother's care, her beauty's pride
  Forgetting, calls the wearied to her side; [70]                  230
  Alternately they mount her back, and rest
  Close by her mantling wings' embraces prest. [R]

    Long may they float upon this flood serene;
  Theirs be these holms untrodden, still, and green,
  Where leafy shades fence off the blustering gale,                235
  And breathes in peace the lily of the vale![71]
  Yon isle, which feels not even the milk-maid's feet,
  Yet hears her song, "by distance made more sweet," [72] [S]
  Yon isle conceals their home, their hut-like bower;
  Green water-rushes overspread the floor; [73]                    240
  Long grass and willows form the woven wall,
  And swings above the roof the poplar tall.
  Thence issuing often with unwieldy stalk,
  They crush with broad black feet their flowery walk; [74]
  Or, from the neighbouring water, hear at morn [75]               245
  The hound, the horse's tread, and mellow horn;
  Involve their serpent-necks in changeful rings,
  Rolled wantonly between their slippery wings,
  Or, starting up with noise and rude delight,
  Force half upon the wave their cumbrous flight. [76]             250

    Fair Swan! by all a mother's joys caressed,
  Haply some wretch has eyed, and called thee blessed;
  When with her infants, from some shady seat
  By the lake's edge, she rose--to face the noontide heat;
  Or taught their limbs along the dusty road                       255
  A few short steps to totter with their load. [77]

    I see her now, denied to lay her head,
  On cold blue nights, in hut or straw-built shed,
  Turn to a silent smile their sleepy cry,
  By pointing to the gliding moon [78] on high.                    260

 --[79] When low-hung clouds each star of summer hide,
  And fireless are the valleys far and wide,
  Where the brook brawls along the public [80] road
  Dark with bat-haunted ashes stretching broad,
  [81] Oft has she taught them on her lap to lay                   265
  The shining glow-worm; or, in heedless play,
  Toss it from hand to hand, disquieted;
  While others, not unseen, are free to shed
  Green unmolested light upon their mossy bed. [82]

    Oh! when the sleety showers her path assail,                   270
  And like a torrent roars the headstrong gale; [83]
  No more her breath can thaw their fingers cold,
  Their frozen arms her neck no more can fold;
  [84] Weak roof a cowering form two babes to shield,
  And faint the fire a dying heart can yield!                      275
  Press the sad kiss, fond mother! vainly fears
  Thy flooded cheek to wet them with its tears;
  [85] No tears can chill them, and no bosom warms,
  Thy breast their death-bed, coffined in thine arms!

    Sweet are the sounds that mingle from afar,                    280
  Heard by calm lakes, as peeps the folding star,
  Where the duck dabbles 'mid the rustling sedge,
  And feeding pike starts from the water's edge,
  Or the swan stirs the reeds, his neck and bill
  Wetting, that drip upon the water still;                         285
  And heron, as resounds the trodden shore,
  Shoots upward, darting his long neck before.
  [86]
    Now, with religious awe, the farewell light
  Blends with the solemn colouring of night; [87]
  'Mid groves of clouds that crest the mountain's brow,            290
  And round the west's proud lodge their shadows throw,
  Like Una [T] shining on her gloomy way,
  The half-seen form of Twilight roams astray;
  Shedding, through paly loop-holes mild and small,
  Gleams that upon the lake's still bosom fall; [88]               295
  [89] Soft o'er the surface creep those lustres pale
  Tracking the motions of the fitful gale. [90]
  With restless interchange at once the bright
  Wins on the shade, the shade upon the light.
  No favoured eye was e'er allowed to gaze                         300
  On lovelier spectacle in faery days;
  When gentle Spirits urged a sportive chase,
  Brushing with lucid wands the water's face;
  While music, stealing round the glimmering deeps,
  Charmed the tall circle of the enchanted steeps.                 305
 --The lights are vanished from the watery plains:
  No wreck of all the pageantry remains.
  Unheeded night has overcome the vales:
  On the dark earth the wearied vision fails;
  The latest lingerer of the forest train,                         310
  The lone black fir, forsakes the faded plain;
  Last evening sight, the cottage smoke, no more,
  Lost in the thickened darkness, glimmers hoar;
  And, towering from the sullen dark-brown mere,
  Like a black wall, the mountain-steeps appear. [91]              315

 --Now o'er the soothed accordant heart we feel
  A sympathetic twilight slowly steal,
  And ever, as we fondly muse, we find
  The soft gloom deepening on the tranquil mind.
  Stay! pensive, sadly-pleasing visions, stay!                     320
  Ah no! as fades the vale, they fade away:
  Yet still the tender, vacant gloom remains;
  Still the cold cheek its shuddering tear retains.

    The bird, who ceased, with fading light, to thread
  Silent the hedge or steamy rivulet's bed, [92]                   325
  From his grey re-appearing tower shall soon
  Salute with gladsome note the rising moon,
  While with a hoary light she frosts the ground,
  And pours a deeper blue to Aether's bound;
  Pleased, as she moves, her pomp of clouds to fold                330
  In robes of azure, fleecy-white, and gold. [93]

    Above yon eastern hill, [94] where darkness broods
  O'er all its vanished dells, and lawns, and woods;
  Where but a mass of shade the sight can trace,
  Even now she shows, half-veiled, her lovely face: [95]           335
  Across [96] the gloomy valley flings her light,
  Far to the western slopes with hamlets white;
  And gives, where woods the chequered upland strew,
  To the green corn of summer, autumn's hue.

  Thus Hope, first pouring from her blessed horn                   340
  Her dawn, far lovelier than the moon's own morn,
  'Till higher mounted, strives in vain to cheer
  The weary hills, impervious, blackening near;
  Yet does she still, undaunted, throw the while
  On darling spots remote her tempting smile.                      345

  Even now she decks for me a distant scene,
  (For dark and broad the gulf of time between)
  Gilding that cottage with her fondest ray,
  (Sole bourn, sole wish, sole object of my way;                   350
  How fair its lawns and sheltering [97] woods appear!
  How sweet its streamlet murmurs in mine ear!)
  Where we, my Friend, to happy [98] days shall rise,
  'Till our small share of hardly-paining sighs
  (For sighs will ever trouble human breath)                       355
  Creep hushed into the tranquil breast of death.

  But now the clear bright Moon her zenith gains,
  And, rimy without speck, extend the plains:
  The deepest cleft the mountain's front displays [99]
  Scarce hides a shadow from her searching rays;                   360
  From the dark-blue faint silvery threads divide
  The hills, while gleams below the azure tide;
  Time softly treads; throughout the landscape breathes
  A peace enlivened, not disturbed, by wreaths
  Of charcoal-smoke, that o'er the fallen wood,                    365
  Steal down the hill, and spread along the flood.[100]

    The song of mountain-streams, unheard by day,
  Now hardly heard, beguiles my homeward way. [U]
  Air listens, like the sleeping water, still,
  To catch the spiritual music of the hill, [101]                  370
  Broke only by the slow clock tolling deep,
  Or shout that wakes the ferry-man from sleep,
  The echoed hoof nearing the distant shore,
  The boat's first motion--made with dashing oar; [102]
  Sound of closed gate, across the water borne,                    375
  Hurrying the timid [103] hare through rustling corn;
  The sportive outcry of the mocking owl; [104]
  And at long intervals the mill-dog's howl;
  The distant forge's swinging thump profound;
  Or yell, in the deep woods, of lonely hound.                     380



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE ABOVE POEM:


[Variant 1:

1836.

    His wizard course where hoary Derwent takes
    Thro' craggs, and forest glooms, and opening lakes,
    Staying his silent waves, to hear the roar
    That stuns the tremulous cliffs of high Lodore:
    Where silver rocks the savage prospect chear
    Of giant yews that frown on Rydale's mere;          1793.

  Where Derwent stops his course to hear the roar
  That stuns the tremulous cliffs ...                   1827.

(Omitting two lines of the 1793 text quoted above.)]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  Where, bosom'd deep, the shy Winander peeps    1793.

  Where, deep embosom'd, shy Winander peeps      1827.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

    Fair scenes! with other eyes, than once, I gaze,
    The ever-varying charm your round displays,
    Than when, ere-while, I taught, "a happy child,"
    The echoes of your rocks my carols wild:
    Then did no ebb of chearfulness demand
    Sad tides of joy from Melancholy's hand;        1793.

    Upon the varying charm your round displays,     1820.]


[Variant 4:

1820.

    ... wild ...    1793.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

    ... stars of night,
    Alike, when first the vales the bittern fills,
    Or the first woodcocks roam'd the moonlight hills.  1793.

    Alike, when heard the bittern's hollow bill,
    Or the first woodcocks roam'd the moonlight hill.   1820.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

    Return Delights! with whom my road begun,
    When Life rear'd laughing up her morning sun;
    When Transport kiss'd away my april tear,
    "Rocking as in a dream the tedious year";
    When link'd with thoughtless Mirth I cours'd the plain,  1793.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

    For then, ev'n then, the little heart would beat       1793.]


[Variant 8:

1836.

    And wild Impatience, panting upward, show'd
    Where tipp'd with gold the mountain-summits glow'd.    1793.]


[Variant 9:

1836.

    With Hope Reflexion blends her social rays             1793.]


[Variant 10:

1820.

    While, Memory at my side, I wander here,
    Starts at the simplest sight th' unbidden tear,
    A form discover'd at the well-known seat,
    A spot, that angles at the riv'let's feet,
    The ray the cot of morning trav'ling nigh,
    And sail that glides the well-known alders by.

Only in the edition of 1793.]


[Variant 11:

1820.

    To shew her yet some joys to me remain,      1793.]


[Variant 12:

1820.

    ... with soft affection's ear,               1793.]


[Variant 13:

1836.

    ... with lights between;
    Gazing the tempting shades to them deny'd,
    When stood the shorten'd herds amid' the tide,
    Where, from the barren wall's unshelter'd end,
    Long rails into the shallow lake extend; 1793.

    When, at the barren wall's unsheltered end,
    Where long rails far into the lake extend,
    Crowded the shortened herds, and beat the tides
    With their quick tails, and lash'd their speckled sides;   1820.]


[Variant 14:

1836.

    And round the humming elm, a glimmering scene!
    In the brown park, in flocks, the troubl'd deer      1793.

    ... in herds, ...                                    1820.]


[Variant 15:

1820.

    When horses in the wall-girt intake stood,
    Unshaded, eying far below, the flood,
    Crouded behind the swain, in mute distress,
    With forward neck the closing gate to press;
    And long, with wistful gaze, his walk survey'd,
    'Till dipp'd his pathway in the river shade;         1793.]


[Variant 16:

1845.

   --Then Quiet led me up the huddling rill,
    Bright'ning with water-breaks the sombrous gill;     1793.

   --Then, while I wandered up the huddling rill
    Brightening with water-breaks the sombrous ghyll,    1820.

    Then, while I wandered where the huddling rill
    Brightens with water-breaks the sombrous ghyll,      1836.]


[Variant 17:

1820.

    To where, while thick above the branches close,
    In dark-brown bason its wild waves repose,
    Inverted shrubs, and moss of darkest green,
    Cling from the rocks, with pale wood-weeds between;
    Save that, atop, the subtle sunbeams shine,
    On wither'd briars that o'er the craggs recline;
    Sole light admitted here, a small cascade,
    Illumes with sparkling foam the twilight shade.
    Beyond, along the visto of the brook,
    Where antique roots its bustling path o'erlook,
    The eye reposes on a secret bridge
    Half grey, half shagg'd with ivy to its ridge.
   --Sweet rill, farewel! ...                          1793.]


[Variant 18:

1845.

    But see aloft the subtle sunbeams shine,
    On withered briars that o'er the crags recline;
    Thus beautiful! as if the sight displayed,
    By its own sparkling foam that small cascade;
    Inverted shrubs, with moss of gloomy green
    Cling from the rocks, with pale wood-weeds between.    C.

    Inverted shrubs with pale wood weeds between
    Cling from the moss-grown rocks, a darksome green,
    Save where aloft the subtle sunbeams shine
    And its own twilight softens the whole scene.
    And sparkling as it foams a small cascade
    Illumines from within the impervious shade
    Below, right in the vista of the brook,
    Where antique roots, etc.                            MS.]


[Variant 19:

1845.

    Sole light admitted here, a small cascade,
    Illumes with sparkling foam the impervious shade;    1820.]


[Variant 20:

1827.

    ... path ...          1793.]


[Variant 21:

1845.

    Whence hangs, in the cool shade, the listless swain
    Lingering behind his disappearing wain.              1820.]


[Variant 22:

1845.

   --Sweet rill, ...     1793.]


[Variant 23:

1820.

    ... and ...           1793.]


[Variant 24:

1845.

    And desert ...         1793]


[Variant 25:

1820.

    How pleasant, as the yellowing sun declines,
    And with long rays and shades the landscape shines;
    To mark the birches' stems all golden light,
    That lit the dark slant woods with silvery white!
    The willow's weeping trees, that twinkling hoar,
    Glanc'd oft upturn'd along the breezy shore,
    Low bending o'er the colour'd water, fold
    Their moveless boughs and leaves like threads of gold;
    The skiffs with naked masts at anchor laid,
    Before the boat-house peeping thro' the shade;
    Th' unwearied glance of woodman's echo'd stroke;
    And curling from the trees the cottage smoke.
      Their pannier'd train ...                             1793.]


[Variant 26:

1845.

    ... zephyrs ...        1820.]


[Variant 27: This stanza was added in the edition of 1820.]


[Variant 28:

1845.

This couplet was added in 1845.]


[Variant 29:

1845.

    And now the universal tides repose,
    And, brightly blue, the burnished mirror glows,    1820.]


[Variant 30:

1845.

    The sails are dropped, the poplar's foliage sleeps,
    And insects clothe, like dust, the glassy deeps.

This couplet followed l. 127 from 1820 to 1843.]


[Variant 31:

1820

   Shot, down the headlong pathway darts his sledge;    1793.]


[Variant 32:

1820.

    Beside their sheltering [i] cross of wall, the flock
    Feeds on in light, nor thinks of winter's shock;

Only in the edition of 1793.]


[Variant 33:

1820.

    Dashed down ...      1793.]


[Variant 34:

1836.

    ... verdant ...      1793.]


[Variant 35:

1820.

    Gazed by ...         1793.]


[Variant 36:

1836.

    ... his warrior head.     1793.]


[Variant 37:

1836.

    ... haggard ...     1793.]


[Variant 38:

1836.

    Whose state, like pine-trees, waving to and fro,
    Droops, and o'er canopies his regal brow,

This couplet was inserted in the editions 1793 to 1832.]


[Variant 39:

1820.

    ... blows ...     1793.]


[Variant 40: This couplet was first printed in the edition of 1820.]


[Variant 41:

1836.

    Bright'ning the cliffs between where sombrous pine,
    And yew-trees ...                                         1793.]


[Variant 42:

1836.

    How busy the enormous hive within,     1793.]


[Variant 43:

1836.

    ... with the ...    1793.]


[Variant 44:

1836.

    Some hardly heard their chissel's clinking sound,     1793.]


[Variant 45:

1836.

    ... th' aereal  ... 1793.]


[Variant 46:

1815.

    ... viewless ... 1793.]


[Variant 47:

1836.

    Glad from their airy baskets hang and sing.     1793.]


[Variant 48:

1836.

    Hung o'er a cloud, above the steep that rears     1793.]


[Variant 49:

1820.

    It's ...     1793.]


[Variant 50:

1845.

    And now it touches on the purple steep
    That flings his shadow on the pictur'd deep.    1793.

    That flings its image ...                       1832.

    And now the sun has touched the purple steep
    Whose softened image penetrates the deep.       1836.]


[Variant 51:

1836.

    The coves ...    1793]


[Variant 52:

1836.

    The gilded turn arrays in richer green
    Each speck of lawn the broken rocks between;    1793.

    ... invests with richer green                   1820.]


[Variant 53:

1827.

    ... boles ...    1793.]


[Variant 54:

1827.

    ... in ...    1793.]


[Variant 55:

1836.

    That, barking busy 'mid the glittering rocks,
    Hunts, where he points, the intercepted flocks;    1793.]


[Variant 56:

1845.

    The Druid stones [ii] their lighted fane unfold,    1793.

    ... a burnished ring unfold;                        1836.]


[Variant 57:

1827.

    ... sinks ...     1793.]


[Variant 58:

1845.

    In these lone vales, if aught of faith may claim,
    Thin silver hairs, and ancient hamlet fame;
    When up the hills, as now, retreats the light,
    Strange apparitions mock the village sight.      1793.

    In these secluded vales, if village fame,
    Confirmed by silver hairs, belief may claim;
    When up the hills, as now, retired the light,
    Strange apparitions mocked the gazer's sight.    1820.

    ... shepherd's sight.                            1836.]


[Variant 59:

1836.

    A desperate form appears, that spurs his steed,
    Along the midway cliffs with violent speed;     1793.]


[Variant 60:

1836.

    Anon, in order mounts a gorgeous show
    Of horsemen shadows winding to and fro;         1793.]


[Variant 61: This line was added in 1820.]


[Variant 62:

1820.

    ... is gilt with evening's beam,         1793.]


[Variant 63:

1849.

    ... of the ...    1836.]


[Variant 64:

1836.

    Lost gradual o'er the heights in pomp they go,
    While silent stands th' admiring vale below;
    Till, but the lonely beacon all is fled,
    That tips with eve's last gleam his spiry head.    1793.

    Till, save the lonely beacon, ...                  1820.

In the edition of 1836 the seven lines of the printed
text--205-211--replaced these four lines of the editions 1793-1832.]


[Variant 65:

1836.

    On red slow-waving pinions ...    1793.]


[Variant 66:

1820.

    And, fronting the bright west in stronger lines,
    The oak its dark'ning boughs and foliage twines,    1793.

The edition of 1815 omitted this couplet. It was restored in its final
form in the edition of 1820.]


[Variant 67:

1836.

    I love beside the glowing lake to stray,         1793.

    How pleasant near the tranquil lake to stray,    1815.]


[Variant 68:

1836.

    ... to stray,
    Where winds the road along the secret bay;
    By rills that tumble down the woody steeps,
    And run in transport to the dimpling deeps;
    Along the "wild meand'ring shore" to view,
    Obsequious Grace the winding swan pursue.    1793.

    ... a secret bay;                            1813.

    ... meandering shore" ...                    1815.]


[Variant 69:

1836.

    He swells his lifted chest, and backward flings
    His bridling neck between his tow'ring wings;
    Stately, and burning in his pride, divides
    And glorying looks around, the silent tides:
    On as he floats, the silver'd waters glow,
    Proud of the varying arch and moveless form of snow.    1793.

    ... his towering wings;
    In all the majesty of ease divides,                     1815.]


[Variant 70:

1845.

    ... her beauty's pride
    Forgets, unweary'd watching every side,
    She calls them near, and with affection sweet
    Alternately relieves their weary feet;         1793.]


[Variant 71:

1836.

      Long may ye roam these hermit waves that sleep,
    In birch-besprinkl'd cliffs embosom'd deep;
    These fairy holms untrodden, still, and green,
    Whose shades protect the hidden wave serene;
    Whence fragrance scents the water's desart gale,
    The violet, and the [iii] lily of the vale;      1793.

      Long may ye float upon these floods serene;
    Yours be these holms untrodden, still, and green,
    Whose leafy shades fence off the blustering gale,
    Where breathes in peace the lily of the vale.    1827.]


[Variant 72:

1820.

    Where, tho' her far-off twilight ditty steal,
    They not the trip of harmless milkmaid feel.     1793.]


[Variant 73:

1836.

    Yon tuft conceals your home, your cottage bow'r.
    Fresh water rushes strew the verdant floor;      1793.

    Yon isle conceals ...                            1820.]


[Variant 74:

1836.

    Thence issuing oft, unwieldly as ye stalk,
    Ye crush with broad black feet your flow'ry walk;    1793.

    Thence issuing often with unwieldly stalk,
    With broad black feet ye crush your flow'ry walk;    1820.]


[Variant 75:

1820.

    Safe from your door ye hear at breezy morn,    1793.]


[Variant 76:

1836.

    ... and mellow horn;
    At peace inverted your lithe necks ye lave,
    With the green bottom strewing o'er the wave;
    No ruder sound your desart haunts invades,
    Than waters dashing wild, or rocking shades.
    Ye ne'er, like hapless human wanderers, throw
    Your young on winter's winding sheet of snow.     1793.

    ... and mellow horn;
    Involve your serpent necks in changeful rings,
    Rolled wantonly between your slippery wings,
    Or, starting up with noise and rude delight,
    Force half upon the wave your cumbrous flight.    1820.]


[Variant 77:

1836.

      Fair Swan! by all a mother's joys caress'd,
    Haply some wretch has ey'd, and call'd thee bless'd;
    Who faint, and beat by summer's breathless ray,
    Hath dragg'd her babes along this weary way;
    While arrowy fire extorting feverish groans
    Shot stinging through her stark o'er labour'd bones.
   --With backward gaze, lock'd joints, and step of pain,
    Her seat scarce left, she strives, alas! in vain,
    To teach their limbs along the burning road
    A few short steps to totter with their load,
    Shakes her numb arm that slumbers with its weight,
    And eyes through tears the mountain's shadeless height;
    And bids her soldier come her woes to share,
    Asleep on Bunker's [iv] charnel hill afar;
    For hope's deserted well why wistful look?
    Chok'd is the pathway, and the pitcher broke.    1793.

In 1793 this passage occupied the place of the six lines of the final
text (250-255).


    ... and called thee bless'd;
    The whilst upon some sultry summer's day
    She dragged her babes along this weary way;
    Or taught their limbs along the burning road
    A few short steps to totter with their load.     1820.

    The while ...                                    1832.]


[Variant 78:

1845.

    ... a shooting star ...    1793.]


[Variant 79:

1845.

    I hear, while in the forest depth he sees,
    The Moon's fix'd gaze between the opening trees,
    In broken sounds her elder grief demand,
    And skyward lift, like one that prays, his hand,
    If, in that country, where he dwells afar,
    His father views that good, that kindly star;
   --Ah me! all light is mute amid the gloom,
    The interlunar cavern of the tomb.                1793-1832.

    In broken sounds her elder child demand,
    While toward the sky he lifts his pale bright hand,    1836.

   --Alas! all light ...                                  1836.

Those eight lines were withdrawn in 1845.]


[Variant 80:

1836.

    ... painful ...    1793.]


[Variant 81:

1820.

    The distant clock forgot, and chilling dew,
    Pleas'd thro' the dusk their breaking smiles to view,

Only in the edition of 1793.]


[Variant 82:

1836.

    ... on her lap to play
    Delighted, with the glow-worm's harmless ray
    Toss'd light from hand to hand; while on the ground
    Small circles of green radiance gleam around.       1793.]


[Variant 83:

1836.

    Oh! when the bitter showers her path assail,
    And roars between the hills the torrent gale,    1793.

    ... sleety showers ...    1827.]


[Variant 84:

1827.

    Scarce heard, their chattering lips her shoulder chill,
    And her cold back their colder bosoms thrill;
    All blind she wilders o'er the lightless heath,
    Led by Fear's cold wet hand, and dogg'd by Death;
    Death, as she turns her neck the kiss to seek,
    Breaks off the dreadful kiss with angry shriek.
    Snatch'd from her shoulder with despairing moan,
    She clasps them at that dim-seen roofless stone.--
    "Now ruthless Tempest launch thy deadliest dart!
    Fall fires--but let us perish heart to heart."     1793.

The first, third, and fourth of these couplets were omitted
from the edition of 1820. The whole passage was withdrawn in
1827.]


[Variant 85:

1820.

    Soon shall the Light'ning hold before thy head
    His torch, and shew them slumbering in their bed,

Only in the edition of 1793.]


[Variant 86:

1820.

    While, by the scene compos'd, the breast subsides,
    Nought wakens or disturbs it's tranquil tides;
    Nought but the char that for the may-fly leaps,
    And breaks the mirror of the circling deeps;
    Or clock, that blind against the wanderer born
    Drops at his feet, and stills his droning horn.
   --The whistling swain that plods his ringing way
    Where the slow waggon winds along the bay;
    The sugh [v] of swallow flocks that twittering sweep,
    The solemn curfew swinging long and deep;
    The talking boat that moves with pensive sound,
    Or drops his anchor down with plunge profound;
    Of boys that bathe remote the faint uproar,
    And restless piper wearying out the shore;
    These all to swell the village murmurs blend,
    That soften'd from the water-head descend.
    While in sweet cadence rising small and still
    The far-off minstrels of the haunted hill,
    As the last bleating of the fold expires,
    Tune in the mountain dells their water lyres.

Only in the edition of 1793.]


[Variant 87:

1845.

    ... of the night;    1793.]


[Variant 88:

1815.

    Thence, from three paly loopholes mild and small,
    Slow lights upon the lake's still bosom fall,    1793.]


[Variant 89:

1827.

    Beyond the mountain's giant reach that hides
    In deep determin'd gloom his subject tides.
   --Mid the dark steeps repose the shadowy streams,
    As touch'd with dawning moonlight's hoary gleams,
    Long streaks of fairy light the wave illume
    With bordering lines of intervening gloom,    1793.

The second and third of these couplets were cancelled in the edition of
1815, and the whole passage was withdrawn in 1827.]


[Variant 90:

1836.

    Soft o'er the surface creep the lustres pale
    Tracking with silvering path the changeful gale.    1793.

    ... those lustres pale
    Tracking the fitful motions of the gale.            1815.]


[Variant 91:

1815.

   --'Tis restless magic all; at once the bright [vi]
    Breaks on the shade, the shade upon the light,
    Fair Spirits are abroad; in sportive chase
    Brushing with lucid wands the water's face,
    While music stealing round the glimmering deeps
    Charms the tall circle of th' enchanted steeps.
   --As thro' th' astonished woods the notes ascend,
    The mountain streams their rising song suspend;
    Below Eve's listening Star, the sheep walk stills
    It's drowsy tinklings on th' attentive hills;
    The milkmaid stops her ballad, and her pail
    Stays it's low murmur in th' unbreathing vale;
    No night-duck clamours for his wilder'd mate,
    Aw'd, while below the Genii hold their state.
   --The pomp is fled, and mute the wondrous strains,
    No wrack of all the pageant scene remains,
    [vii] So vanish those fair Shadows, human Joys,
    But Death alone their vain regret destroys.
    Unheeded Night has overcome the vales,
    On the dark earth the baffl'd vision fails,
    If peep between the clouds a star on high,
    There turns for glad repose the weary eye;
    The latest lingerer of the forest train,
    The lone-black fir, forsakes the faded plain;
    Last evening sight, the cottage smoke no more,
    Lost in the deepen'd darkness, glimmers hoar;
    High towering from the sullen dark-brown mere,
    Like a black wall, the mountain steeps appear,
    Thence red from different heights with restless gleam
    Small cottage lights across the water stream,
    Nought else of man or life remains behind
    To call from other worlds the wilder'd mind,
    Till pours the wakeful bird her solemn strains
    [viii] Heard by the night-calm of the watry plains.
   --No purple prospects now the mind employ
    Glowing in golden sunset tints of joy,
    But o'er the sooth'd ...

Only in the edition of 1793.]


[Variant 92:

1836.

    The bird, with fading light who ceas'd to thread
    Silent the hedge or steaming rivulet's bed,           1793.

    The bird, who ceased, with fading light, to thread    1815.]


[Variant 93:

1836.

    Salute with boding note the rising moon,
    Frosting with hoary light the pearly ground,
    And pouring deeper blue to Aether's bound;
    Rejoic'd her solemn pomp of clouds to fold
    In robes of azure, fleecy white, and gold,
    While rose and poppy, as the glow-worm fades,
    Checquer with paler red the thicket shades.       1793.


The last two lines occur only in the edition of 1793.

    And pleased her solemn pomp of clouds to fold     1815.]


[Variant 94:

1836.

    Now o'er the eastern hill, ...     1793.

    See, o'er ...                      1815.]


[Variant 95:

1836.

    She lifts in silence up her lovely face;     1793.]


[Variant 96:

1836.

    Above ...     1793.]


[Variant 97:

1815.

    ... silvery ...     1793.]


[Variant 98:

1815.

    ... golden ...     1793.]


[Variant 99:

1836.

    The deepest dell the mountain's breast displays,     1793.

    ... the mountain's front ...                         1820.]


[Variant 100:

1836.

    The scene is waken'd, yet its peace unbroke,
    By silver'd wreaths of quiet charcoal smoke,
    That, o'er the ruins of the fallen wood,
    Steal down the hills, and spread along the flood.     1793.]



[Variant 101:

1836.

    All air is, as the sleeping water, still,
    List'ning th' aereal music of the hill,       1793.

    Air listens, as the sleeping water still,
    To catch the spiritual music of the hill,     1832.]


[Variant 102:

1836.

    Soon follow'd by his hollow-parting oar,
    And echo'd hoof approaching the far shore;     1793.]


[Variant 103:

1836.

    ... the feeding ...     1793.]


[Variant 104:

1836.

    The tremulous sob of the complaining owl;     1793.]


       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON VARIANTS (Sub-Footnotes)


[Sub-Footnote i: These rude structures, to protect the flocks, are
frequent in this country: the traveller may recollect one in Withburne,
another upon Whinlatter.--W. W. 1793.]


[Sub-Footnote ii: Not far from Broughton is a Druid monument, of which I
do not recollect that any tour descriptive of this country makes
mention. Perhaps this poem may fall into the hands of some curious
traveller, who may thank me for informing him, that up the Duddon, the
river which forms the aestuary at Broughton, may be found some of the
most romantic scenery of these mountains.--W. W. 1793.

This circle is at the top of Swinside, a glen about four miles from
Broughton. It consists of 50 stones, 90 yards in circumference; and is
on the fell, which is part of the range terminating in Black
Combe.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote iii: The lily of the valley is found in great abundance in
the smaller islands of Winandermere.--W. W. 1793.]


[Sub-Footnote iv: In the 1793 edition this line reads "Asleep on
Minden's charnel plain afar." The 'errata', list inserted in some copies
of that edition gives "Bunker's charnel hill."--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote v: Sugh, a Scotch word, expressive, as Mr. Gilpin explains
it, of the sound of the motion of a stick through the air, or of the
wind passing through the trees. See Burns' 'Cottar's Saturday
Night'.--W. W. 1793.

The line is in stanza ii., l. 1:

  November chill blaws loud, wi' angry sugh.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote vi: This long passage occupies, in the edition of 1793,
the place of lines 297-314 in the final text given above.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote vii:

  "So break those glittering shadows, human joys"

(YOUNG).--W. W. 1793.

The line occurs 'Night V, The Complaint', l. 1042, or l. 27 from the
end.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote viii:

  "Charming the night-calm with her powerful song."

A line of one of our older poets.--W. W. 1793.

This line I have been unable to discover, but see Webster and Dekker in
'Westward Hoe', iv. c.

  "Charms with her excellent voice an awful silence through all this
  building."

Ed.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT


[Footnote A: See note to the "Juvenile Pieces" in the edition of 1836
(p. 1).--Ed.]


[Footnote B: It may not be irrelevant to mention that our late poet,
Robert Browning, besought me--both in conversation, and by letter--to
restore this "discarded" picture, in editing 'Dion'.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: These lines are only applicable to the middle part of that
lake.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote D: In the beginning of winter, these mountains, in the
moonlight nights, are covered with immense quantities of woodcocks;
which, in the dark nights, retire into the woods.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote E: The word 'intake' is local, and signifies a
mountain-inclosure.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote F: Gill is also, I believe, a term confined to this country.
Glen, gill, and dingle, have the same meaning.--W. W. 1793.

The spelling "Ghyll" is first used in the edition of 1820 in the text.
In the note to that edition it remains "gill". In 1827 the spelling in
the note was "ghyll."--Ed.]


[Footnote G: Compare Dr. John Brown:

  Not a passing breeze
  Sigh'd to the grove, which in the midnight air
  Stood motionless, and in the peaceful floods
  Inverted hung.

and see note A to page 31.--Ed. [Footnote U of this poem]]


[Footnote H: This line was first inserted in the edition of 1845. In the
following line, the edition of 1793 has

  Save that, atop, the subtle ...

Subsequent editions previous to 1845 have

  Save that aloft ...

Ed.]


[Footnote J: The reader, who has made the tour of this country, will
recognize, in this description, the features which characterize the
lower waterfall in the gardens of Rydale.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote K:

  "Vivid rings of green."

Greenwood's Poem on Shooting.--W. W. 1793.

The title is 'A Poem written during a Shooting Excursion on the Moors'.
It was published by Cruttwell at Bath in 1787, 4to, pp. 25. The
quotation is from stanza xvi., l. 11.--Ed.]


[Footnote L:

  "Down the rough slope the pondrous waggon rings."

BEATTIE.--W. W.

1793. See 'The Minstrel', stanza xxxix., l. 4.--Ed.]


[Footnote M:

"Dolcemente feroce."

TASSO. In this description of the cock, I remembered a spirited one of
the same animal in the 'L'Agriculture ou Les Georgiques Francoises', of
M. Rossuet.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote N: I am unable to trace this quotation.--Ed.]


[Footnote P: From Thomson: see Scott's 'Critical Essays'.--W. W. 1793.

It is difficult to know to what Wordsworth here alludes, but compare
'The Seasons', "Summer," l. 1467.

                        and now a golden curve,
  Gives one bright glance, then total disappears.--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: See a description of an appearance of this kind in Clark's
'Survey of the Lakes', accompanied with vouchers of its veracity, that
may amuse the reader.--W. W. 1793.

The passage in Clark's folio volume, 'A Survey of the Lakes', etc.,
which suggested to Wordsworth the above lines in the 'Evening Walk', is
to be found in chapter i. of the second book, p. 55. It gives a weird
account of the appearance of horsemen being exercised in troops upon

  "Southen-fell side, as seen on the 25th of June 1744 by William
  Lancaster of Blakehills, and a farm servant, David Strichet:

  "These visionary horsemen seemed to come from the lowest part of
  Southen-fell, and became visible just at a place called Knott. They
  then moved in regular troops along the side of the fell, till they
  came opposite Blakehills, when they went over the mountain. Then they
  described a kind of curvilinear path upon the side of the fell, and
  both these first and last appearances were bounded by the top of the
  mountain.

  "Frequently the last, or last but one, in a troop would leave his
  place, and gallop to the front, and then take the same pace with the
  rest--a regular swift walk. Thus changes happened to every troop (for
  many troops appeared) and oftener than once or twice, yet not at all
  times alike.... Nor was this phenomenon seen at Blakehill only, it was
  seen by every person at every cottage within the distance of a mile.
  Neither was it confined to a momentary view, for from the time that
  Strichet first observed it, the appearance must have lasted at least
  two hours and a half, viz. from half past seven till the night coming
  on prevented further view."

This interesting optical illusion--which suggests the wonderful island
in the Atlantic, seen from the isles of Aran near Galway, alluded to in
the 'Chorographical description of West, or H-Ier-Connaught', of R.
O'Flaherty--was caused by the peculiar angle of the light from the
setting sun, the reflection of the water of the Solway, and the
refraction of the vapour and clouds above the Solway. These aerial and
visionary horsemen were being exercised somewhere above the
Kirkcudbright shore. It was not the first time the phenomenon had been
seen within historic times, on the same fell-side, and at the same time
of year. Canon Rawnsley writes to me,

  "I have an idea that the fact that it took place at midsummer eve
  (June 27), the eve of the Feast of St. John, upon which occasion the
  shepherds hereabout used to light bonfires on the hills (no doubt a
  relic of the custom of the Beltane fires of old Norse days, perhaps of
  earlier sun-worship festivals of British times), may have had
  something to do with the naming of the mountain Blencathara of which
  Southen-fell (or Shepherd's-fell, as the name implies) is part.
  Blencathara, we are told, may mean the Hill of Demons, or the haunted
  hill. My suggestion is that the old sun-worshippers, who met in
  midsummer eve on Castrigg at the Druid circle or Donn-ring, saw just
  the same phenomenon as Strichet and Lancaster saw upon Southen-fell,
  and hence the name. Nay, perhaps the Druid circle was built where it
  is, because it was well in view of the Demon Hill."

Ed.]


[Footnote R: This is a fact of which I have been an eye-witness.--W. W.
1793.]


[Footnote S: The quotation is from Collins' 'The Passions', l. 60.
Compare 'Personal Talk', l. 26.--Ed.]


[Footnote T: Alluding to this passage of Spenser:

     ... Her angel face
  As the great eye of Heaven shined bright,
  And made a sunshine in that shady place.    W. W. 1793.

This passage is in 'The Fairy Queen', book I. canto iii. stanza 4.--Ed.]


[Footnote U: Compare Dr. John Brown:

  But the soft murmur of swift-gushing rills,
  Forth issuing from the mountain's distant steep
  (Unheard till now, and now scarce heard), proclaim'd
  All things at rest.

This Dr. John Brown--a singularly versatile English divine
(1717-1766)--was one of the first, as Wordsworth pointed put, to lead
the way to a true estimate of the English Lakes. His description of the
Vale of Keswick, in a letter to a friend, is as fine as anything in
Gray's 'Journal'. Wordsworth himself quotes the lines given in this
footnote in the first section of his 'Guide through the District of the
Lakes'.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





LINES WRITTEN WHILE SAILING IN A BOAT AT EVENING


Composed 1789.--Published 1798


  [This title is scarcely correct. It was during a solitary walk on the
  banks of the Cam that I was first struck with this appearance, and
  applied it to my own feelings in the manner here expressed, changing
  the scene to the Thames, near Windsor. This, and the three stanzas of
  the following poem, 'Remembrance of Collins', formed one piece; but,
  upon the recommendation of Coleridge, the three last stanzas were
  separated from the other.--I. F.]

The title of the poem in 1798, when it consisted of five stanzas, was
'Lines written near Richmond, upon the Thames, at Evening'. When, in the
edition of 1800, it was divided, the title of the first part was, 'Lines
written when sailing in a Boat at Evening'; that of the second part was
'Lines written near Richmond upon the Thames'.

From 1815 to 1843, both poems were placed by Wordsworth among those "of
Sentiment and Reflection." In 1845 they were transferred to "Poems
written in Youth."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  How richly glows the water's breast
  Before us, tinged with evening hues, [1]
  While, facing thus the crimson west,
  The boat her silent course [2] pursues!
  And see how dark the backward stream!                            5
  A little moment past so smiling!
  And still, perhaps, with faithless gleam,
  Some other loiterers [3] beguiling.

  Such views the youthful Bard allure;
  But, heedless of the following gloom,                           10
  He deems their colours shall endure
  Till peace go with him to the tomb.
 --And let him nurse his fond deceit,
  And what if he must die in sorrow!
  Who would not cherish dreams so sweet,                          15
  Though grief and pain may come to-morrow?


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1815.

    How rich the wave, in front, imprest
    With evening-twilight's summer hues,     1798.]


[Variant 2:

1802.

    ... path ...     1798.]


[Variant 3:

1815.

    ... loiterer ...     1798.]





       *       *       *       *       *





REMEMBRANCE OF COLLINS


COMPOSED UPON THE THAMES NEAR RICHMOND [A]


Composed 1789.--Published 1798


       *       *       *       *       *


  Glide gently, thus for ever glide,[B]
  O Thames! that other bards may see
  As lovely visions by thy side
  As now, fair river! come to me.
  O glide, fair stream! for ever so,                               5
  Thy quiet soul on all bestowing,
  Till all our minds for ever flow
  As thy deep waters now are flowing.

  Vain thought!--Yet be as now thou art,
  That in thy waters may be seen                                  10
  The image of a poet's heart,
  How bright, how solemn, how serene!
  Such as did once the Poet bless, [1]
  Who murmuring here a later [C] ditty, [2]
  Could find no refuge from distress                              15
  But in the milder grief of pity.

  Now let us, as we float along, [3]
  For _him_ [4] suspend the dashing oar; [D]
  And pray that never child of song
  May know that Poet's sorrows more. [5]                          20
  How calm! how still! the only sound,
  The dripping of the oar suspended!
 --The evening darkness gathers round
  By virtue's holiest Powers attended.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1800.

    Such heart did once the poet bless,    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

    Who, pouring here a _later_ [i] ditty,    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1802.

    Remembrance, as we glide along,    1798.

    ... float ...                      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1802.

    For him ...    1798.]


[Variant 5:

1802.

    May know his freezing sorrows more.    1798.]


[Sub-Footnote i: The italics only occur in the editions of 1798 and
1800.--Ed.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES TO THE TEXT


[Footnote A: The title in the editions 1802-1815 was 'Remembrance of
Collins, written upon the Thames near Richmond'.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare the 'After-thought' to "The River Duddon. A Series
of Sonnets":

  Still glides the Stream, and shall for ever glide.

Ed.]


[Footnote C: Collins's 'Ode on the Death of Thomson', the last written,
I believe, of the poems which were published during his life-time. This
Ode is also alluded to in the next stanza.--W. W. 1798.]


[Footnote D: Compare Collins's 'Ode on the Death of Thomson', 'The Scene
on the Thames near Richmond':

  Remembrance oft shall haunt the shore
   When Thames in summer wreaths is drest.
  And oft suspend the dashing oar
   To bid his gentle spirit rest.

As Mr. Dowden suggests, the _him_ was probably italicised by Wordsworth,
"because the oar is suspended not for Thomson but for Collins." The
italics were first used in the edition of 1802.--Ed.]





        *       *       *       *       *





DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES TAKEN DURING A PEDESTRIAN TOUR AMONG THE ALPS


Composed 1791-2. [A]--Published 1793


  TO THE REV. ROBERT JONES, FELLOW OF ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

  DEAR SIR, [B]--However desirous I might have been of giving you proofs
  of the high place you hold in my esteem, I should have been cautious
  of wounding your delicacy by thus publicly addressing you, had not the
  circumstance of our having been companions among the Alps, seemed to
  give this dedication a propriety sufficient to do away any scruples
  which your modesty might otherwise have suggested. [C]

  In inscribing this little work to you, I consult my heart. You know
  well how great is the difference between two companions lolling in a
  post-chaise, and two travellers plodding slowly along the road, side
  by side, each with his little knapsack of necessaries upon his
  shoulders. How much more of heart between the two latter!

  I am happy in being conscious that I shall have one reader who will
  approach the conclusion of these few pages with regret. You they must
  certainly interest, in reminding you of moments to which you can
  hardly look back without a pleasure not the less dear from a shade of
  melancholy. You will meet with few images without recollecting the
  spot where we observed them together; consequently, whatever is feeble
  in my design, or spiritless in my colouring, will be amply supplied by
  your own memory.

  With still greater propriety I might have inscribed to you a
  description of some of the features of your native mountains, through
  which we have wandered together, in the same manner, with so much
  pleasure. But the sea-sunsets, which give such splendour to the vale
  of Clwyd, Snowdon, the chair of Idris, the quiet village of
  Bethgelert, Menai and her Druids, the Alpine steeps of the Conway, and
  the still more interesting windings of the wizard stream of the Dee,
  remain yet untouched. Apprehensive that my pencil may never be
  exercised on these subjects, I cannot let slip this opportunity of
  thus publicly assuring you with how much affection and esteem

  I am, dear Sir,
  Most sincerely yours,
  W. WORDSWORTH.

  LONDON, 1793.


  [Much the greatest part of this poem was composed during my walks upon
  the banks of the Loire, in the years 1791, 1792. I will only notice
  that the description of the valley filled with mist, beginning--'In
  solemn shapes'--was taken from that beautiful region of which the
  principal features are Lungarn and Sarnen. Nothing that I ever saw in
  Nature left a more delightful impression on my mind than that which I
  have attempted, alas, how feebly! to convey to others in these lines.
  Those two lakes have always interested me especially, from bearing in
  their size and other features, a resemblance to those of the North of
  England. It is much to be deplored that a district so beautiful should
  be so unhealthy as it is.--I. F.]

As the original text of the 'Descriptive Sketches' is printed in
Appendix I. (p. 309) to this volume--with all the notes to that edition
of 1793--it is not quoted in the footnotes to the final text in the
pages which follow, except in cases which will justify themselves.
Therefore the various readings which follow begin with the edition of
1815, which was, however, a mere fragment of the original text. Almost
the whole of the poem of 1793 was reproduced in 1820, but there were
many alterations of the text in that edition, and in those of 1827,
1832, 1836 and 1845. Wordsworth's own footnotes here reproduced are
those which he retained in the edition of 1849.

'Descriptive Sketches' was ranked among the "Juvenile Pieces" from 1815
onwards: but in 1836 it was put in a class by itself along with the
'Female Vagrant'. [D]--Ed.

'Happiness (if she had been to be found on earth) among the charms of
Nature--Pleasures of the pedestrian Traveller--Author crosses France to
the Alps--Present state of the Grande Chartreuse--Lake of Como--Time,
Sunset--Same Scene, Twilight--Same Scene, Morning; its voluptuous
Character; Old man and forest-cottage music--River Tusa--Via Mala and
Grison Gipsy--Sckellenen-thal--Lake of Uri--Stormy sunset--Chapel of
William Tell--Force of local emotion--Chamois-chaser--View of the higher
Alps--Manner of Life of a Swiss mountaineer, interspersed with views of
the higher Alps--Golden Age of the Alps--Life and views continued--Ranz
des Vaches, famous Swiss Air--Abbey of Einsiedlen and its
pilgrims--Valley of Chamouny--Mont Blanc--Slavery of Savoy--Influence of
liberty on cottage-happiness--France--Wish for the Extirpation of
slavery--Conclusion'.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  Were there, below, a spot of holy ground
  Where from distress a refuge might be found,
  And solitude prepare the soul for heaven;
  Sure, nature's God that spot to man had given [1]
  Where falls the purple morning far and wide                      5
  In flakes of light upon the mountain-side;
  Where with loud voice the power of water shakes [2]
  The leafy wood, or sleeps in quiet lakes.

   Yet not unrecompensed the man shall roam,
  Who at the call of summer quits his home,                       10
  And plods through some wide realm o'er vale and height,
  Though seeking only holiday delight; [3]
  At least, not owning to himself an aim
  To which the sage would give a prouder name. [4]
  No gains too cheaply earned his fancy cloy,                     15
  Though every passing zephyr whispers joy;
  Brisk toil, alternating with ready ease,
  Feeds the clear current of his sympathies. [5]
  For him sod-seats the cottage-door adorn;
  And peeps the far-off spire, his evening bourn!                 20
  Dear is the forest frowning o'er his head,
  And dear the velvet green-sward to his tread: [6]
  Moves there a cloud o'er mid-day's flaming eye?
  Upward he looks--"and calls it luxury:" [E]
  Kind Nature's charities his steps attend;                       25
  In every babbling brook he finds a friend;
  While [7] chastening thoughts of sweetest use, bestowed
  By wisdom, moralise his pensive road.
  Host of his welcome inn, the noon-tide bower,
  To his spare meal he calls the passing poor;                    30
  He views the sun uplift his golden fire,
  Or sink, with heart alive like Memnon's lyre; [F]
  Blesses the moon that comes with kindly ray,
  To light him shaken by his rugged way. [8]
  Back from his sight no bashful children steal;                  35
  He sits a brother at the cottage-meal; [9]
  His humble looks no shy restraint impart;
  Around him plays at will the virgin heart.
  While unsuspended wheels the village dance,
  The maidens eye him with enquiring glance,                      40
  Much wondering by what fit of crazing care,
  Or desperate love, bewildered, he came there. [10]

    A hope, that prudence could not then approve,
  That clung to Nature with a truant's love,
  O'er Gallia's wastes of corn my footsteps led;                  45
  Her files of road-elms, high above my head
  In long-drawn vista, rustling in the breeze;
  Or where her pathways straggle as they please
  By lonely farms and secret villages.
  But lo! the Alps ascending white in air, [11]                   50
  Toy with the sun and glitter from afar.

    And now, emerging from the forest's gloom,
  I greet thee, Chartreuse, while I mourn thy doom.
  Whither is fled that Power whose frown severe
  Awed sober Reason till she crouched in fear? [12]               55
  _That_ Silence, once in deathlike fetters bound,
  Chains that were loosened only by the sound
  Of holy rites chanted in measured round? [13]

 --The voice of blasphemy the fane alarms,
  The cloister startles at the gleam of arms. [14]                60
  The [15] thundering tube the aged angler hears, [G]
  Bent o'er the groaning flood that sweeps away his tears. [16]
  Cloud-piercing pine-trees nod their troubled heads, [17]
  Spires, rocks, and lawns a browner night o'erspreads;
  Strong terror checks the female peasant's sighs,                65
  And start the astonished shades at female eyes.
  From Bruno's forest screams the affrighted jay,
  And slow the insulted eagle wheels away.
  A viewless flight of laughing Demons mock
  The Cross, by angels planted [H] on the aerial rock. [18]       70
  The "parting Genius" [J] sighs with hollow breath
  Along the mystic streams of Life and Death.[K]
  Swelling the outcry dull, that long resounds
  Portentous through her old woods' trackless bounds,
  Vallombre, [L] 'mid her falling fanes deplores                  75
  For ever broke, the sabbath of her bowers.

    More pleased, my foot the hidden margin roves
  Of Como, bosomed deep in chestnut groves.
  No meadows thrown between, the giddy steeps
  Tower, bare or sylvan, from the narrow deeps.                   80
 --To towns, whose shades of no rude noise [19] complain,
  From ringing team apart [20] and grating wain--
  To flat-roofed towns, that touch the water's bound,
  Or lurk in woody sunless glens profound,
  Or, from the bending rocks, obtrusive cling,                    85
  And o'er the whitened wave their shadows fling--
  The pathway leads, as round the steeps it twines; [21]
  And Silence loves its purple roof of vines.
  The loitering traveller [22] hence, at evening, sees
  From rock-hewn steps the sail between the trees;                90
  Or marks, 'mid opening cliffs, fair dark-eyed maids
  Tend the small harvest of their garden glades;
  Or stops the solemn mountain-shades to view
  Stretch o'er the pictured mirror broad and blue,
  And track the yellow lights from steep to steep,                95
  As up the opposing hills they slowly creep. [23]
  Aloft, here, half a village shines, arrayed
  In golden light; [24] half hides itself in shade:
  While, from amid the darkened roofs, the spire,
  Restlessly flashing, seems to mount like fire: [25]            100
  There, all unshaded, blazing forests throw
  Rich golden verdure on the lake [26] below.
  Slow glides the sail along the illumined shore,
  And steals into the shade the lazy oar;
  Soft bosoms breathe around contagious sighs,                   105
  And amorous music on the water dies.

    How blest, delicious scene! the eye that greets
  Thy open beauties, or thy lone retreats;
  Beholds the unwearied sweep of wood that scales
  Thy cliffs; the endless waters of thy vales; [27]              110
  Thy lowly cots that sprinkle all the shore, [28]
  Each with its [29] household boat beside the door;
  [30] Thy torrents shooting from the clear-blue sky;
  Thy towns, that cleave, like swallows' nests, on high; [31]
  That glimmer hoar in eve's last light descried                 115
  Dim from the twilight water's shaggy side,
  Whence lutes and voices down the enchanted woods
  Steal, and compose the oar-forgotten floods;
  [32]--Thy lake, that, streaked or dappled, blue or grey,
  'Mid smoking woods gleams hid from morning's ray [33]          120
  Slow-travelling down the western hills, to' enfold [34]
  Its green-tinged margin in a blaze of gold;
  Thy glittering steeples, whence the matin bell
  Calls forth the woodman from his desert cell,
  And quickens the blithe sound of oars that pass                125
  Along the steaming lake, to early mass. [35]
  But now farewell to each and all--adieu
  To every charm, and last and chief to you, [36]
  Ye lovely maidens that in noontide shade
  Rest near your little plots of wheaten glade; [37]             130
  To all that binds [38] the soul in powerless trance,
  Lip-dewing song, and ringlet-tossing dance;
  Where sparkling eyes and breaking smiles illume
  The sylvan cabin's lute-enlivened gloom.
 --Alas! the very murmur of the streams                         135
  Breathes o'er the failing soul voluptuous dreams,
  While Slavery, forcing the sunk mind to dwell
  On joys that might disgrace the captive's cell,
  Her shameless timbrel shakes on Como's marge,
  And lures [39] from bay to bay the vocal barge.                140

    Yet are thy softer arts with power indued
  To soothe and cheer the poor man's solitude.
  By silent cottage-doors, the peasant's home
  Left vacant for the day, I loved to roam. [40]
  But once I pierced the mazes of a wood                         145
  In which a cabin undeserted stood; [41]
  There an old man an olden measure scanned
  On a rude viol touched with withered hand. [42]
  As lambs or fawns in April clustering lie [43]
  Under a hoary oak's thin canopy,                               150
  Stretched at his feet, with stedfast upward eye,
  His children's children listened to the sound; [44]
 --A Hermit with his family around!

    But let us hence; for fair Locarno smiles
  Embowered in walnut slopes and citron isles:                   155
  Or seek at eve the banks of Tusa's stream,
  Where, [45] 'mid dim towers and woods, her [M] waters gleam.
  From the bright wave, in solemn gloom, retire
  The dull-red steeps, and, darkening still, aspire
  To where afar rich orange lustres glow                         160
  Round undistinguished clouds, and rocks, and snow:
  Or, led where Via Mala's chasms confine
  The indignant waters of the infant Rhine,
  Hang o'er the abyss, whose else impervious gloom [46]
  His burning eyes with fearful light illume.                    165

    The mind condemned, without reprieve, to go
  O'er life's long deserts with its charge of woe,
  With sad congratulation joins the train
  Where beasts and men together o'er the plain
  Move on--a mighty caravan of pain:                             170
  Hope, strength, and courage, social suffering brings,
  Freshening the wilderness with shades and springs.
 --There be whose lot far otherwise is cast:
  Sole human tenant of the piny waste, [47]
  By choice or doom a gipsy wanders here,                        175
  A nursling babe her only comforter;
  Lo, where she sits beneath yon shaggy rock,
  A cowering shape half hid in curling smoke! [48]

    When lightning among clouds and mountain-snows
  Predominates, and darkness comes and goes,                     180
  And the fierce torrent, at the flashes broad
  Starts, like a horse, beside the glaring road--
  She seeks a covert from the battering shower
  In the roofed bridge [N]; the bridge, in that dread hour,
  Itself all trembling at the torrent's power. [49]              185

    Nor is she more at ease on some _still_ night,
  When not a star supplies the comfort of its light;
  Only the waning moon hangs dull and red
  Above a melancholy mountain's head,
  Then sets. In total gloom the Vagrant sighs,                   190
  Stoops her sick head, and shuts her weary eyes;
  Or on her fingers counts the distant clock,
  Or, to the drowsy crow of midnight cock,
  Listens, or quakes while from the forest's gulf
  Howls near and nearer yet the famished wolf. [50]              195

    From the green vale of Urseren smooth and wide
  Descend we now, the maddened Reuss our guide; [51]
  By rocks that, shutting out the blessed day,
  Cling tremblingly to rocks as loose as they;
  By cells [P] upon whose image, while he prays,                 200
  The kneeling peasant scarcely dares to gaze;
  By many a votive death-cross [Q] planted near,
  And watered duly with the pious tear,
  That faded silent from the upward eye
  Unmoved with each rude form of peril nigh; [52]                205
  Fixed on the anchor left by Him who saves
  Alike in whelming snows, and roaring waves.

    But soon a peopled region on the sight
  Opens--a little world of calm delight; [53]
  Where mists, suspended on the expiring gale,                   210
  Spread roof like o'er the deep secluded vale, [54]
  And beams of evening slipping in between,
  Gently illuminate a sober scene:--[55]
  Here, on the brown wood-cottages [R] they sleep, [56]
  There, over rock or sloping pasture creep. [57]                215
  On as we journey, in clear view displayed,
  The still vale lengthens underneath its shade
  Of low-hung vapour: on the freshened mead
  The green light sparkles;--the dim bowers recede. [58]
  While pastoral pipes and streams the landscape lull,           220
  And bells of passing mules that tinkle dull,
  In solemn shapes before the admiring eye
  Dilated hang the misty pines on high,
  Huge convent domes with pinnacles and towers,
  And antique castles seen through gleamy [59] showers.          225

    From such romantic dreams, my soul, awake!
  To sterner pleasure, where, by Uri's lake
  In Nature's pristine majesty outspread,
  Winds neither road nor path for foot to tread: [60]
  The rocks rise naked as a wall, or stretch,                    230
  Far o'er the water, hung with groves of beech; [61]
  Aerial pines from loftier steeps ascend,
  Nor stop but where creation seems to end. [62]
  Yet here and there, if 'mid the savage scene
  Appears a scanty plot of smiling green,                        235
  Up from the lake a zigzag path will creep
  To reach a small wood-hut hung boldly on the steep. [63]
 --Before those thresholds (never can they know [64]
  The face of traveller passing to and fro,)
  No peasant leans upon his pole, to tell                        240
  For whom at morning tolled the funeral bell;
  Their watch-dog ne'er his angry bark foregoes,
  Touched by the beggar's moan of human woes;
  The shady porch ne'er offered a cool seat
  To pilgrims overcome by summer's heat. [65]                    245
  Yet thither the world's business finds its way
  At times, and tales unsought beguile the day,
  And _there_ are those fond thoughts which Solitude, [66]
  However stern, is powerless to exclude. [67]
  There doth the maiden watch her lover's sail                   250
  Approaching, and upbraid the tardy gale;
  At midnight listens till his parting oar,
  And its last echo, can be heard no more. [68]

    And what if ospreys, cormorants, herons cry,
  Amid tempestuous vapours driving by, [69]                      255
  Or hovering over wastes too bleak to rear
  That common growth of earth, the foodful ear; [70]
  Where the green apple shrivels on the spray,
  And pines the unripened pear in summer's kindliest ray; [71]
  Contentment shares the desolate domain [72]                    260
  With Independence, child of high Disdain.
  Exulting 'mid the winter of the skies,
  Shy as the jealous chamois, Freedom flies,
  And grasps by fits her sword, and often eyes;
  And sometimes, as from rock to rock she bounds                 265
  The Patriot nymph starts at imagined sounds,
  And, wildly pausing, oft she hangs aghast,
  Whether some old Swiss air hath checked her haste
  Or thrill of Spartan fife is caught between the blast. [73]

    Swoln with incessant rains from hour to hour, [74]           270
  All day the floods a deepening murmur pour:
  The sky is veiled, and every cheerful sight:
  Dark is the region as with coming night;
  But what a sudden burst of overpowering light!
  Triumphant on the bosom of the storm,                          275
  Glances the wheeling eagle's glorious form![75]
  Eastward, in long perspective glittering, shine
  The wood-crowned cliffs that o'er the lake recline;
  Those lofty cliffs a hundred streams unfold, [76]
  At once to pillars turned that flame with gold:                280
  Behind his sail the peasant shrinks, to shun
  The _west_, [77] that burns like one dilated sun,
  A crucible of mighty compass, felt
  By mountains, glowing till they seem to melt. [78]

    But, lo! the boatman, overawed, before                       285
  The pictured fane of Tell suspends his oar;
  Confused the Marathonian tale appears,
  While his eyes sparkle with heroic tears. [79]
  And who, that walks where men of ancient days
  Have wrought with godlike arm the deeds of praise,             290
  Feels not the spirit of the place control,
  Or rouse [80] and agitate his labouring soul?
  Say, who, by thinking on Canadian hills,
  Or wild Aosta lulled by Alpine rills,
  On Zutphen's plain; or on that highland dell,                  295
  Through which rough Garry cleaves his way, can tell
  What high resolves exalt the tenderest thought
  Of him whom passion rivets to the spot, [81]
  Where breathed the gale that caught Wolfe's happiest sigh,
  And the last sunbeam fell on Bayard's eye;                     300
  Where bleeding Sidney from the cup retired,
  And glad Dundee in "faint huzzas" [S] expired?

   But now with other mind I stand alone
  Upon the summit of this naked cone,
  And watch the fearless chamois-hunter chase                    305
  His prey, through tracts abrupt of desolate space, [82]
  [T] Through vacant worlds where Nature never gave
  A brook to murmur or a bough to wave,
  Which unsubstantial Phantoms sacred keep;
  Thro' worlds where Life, and Voice, and Motion sleep;          310
  Where silent Hours their death-like sway extend,
  Save when the avalanche breaks loose, to rend
  Its way with uproar, till the ruin, drowned
  In some dense wood or gulf of snow profound,
  Mocks the dull ear of Time with deaf abortive sound. [83]      315
 --'Tis his, while wandering on from height to height,
  To see a planet's pomp and steady light
  In the least star of scarce-appearing night;
  While the pale moon moves near him, on the bound
  Of ether, shining with diminished round, [84]                  320
  And far and wide the icy summits blaze,
  Rejoicing in the glory of her rays:
  To him the day-star glitters small and bright,
  Shorn of its beams, insufferably white,
  And he can look beyond the sun, and view                       325
  Those fast-receding depths of sable blue
  Flying till vision can no more pursue! [85]
 --At once bewildering mists around him close,
  And cold and hunger are his least of woes;
  The Demon of the snow, with angry roar                         330
  Descending, shuts for aye his prison door.
  Soon with despair's whole weight his spirits sink;
  Bread has he none, the snow must be his drink;
  And, ere his eyes can close upon the day, [86]
  The eagle of the Alps o'ershades her prey.                     335

   Now couch thyself where, heard with fear afar, [87]
  Thunders through echoing pines the headlong Aar;
  Or rather stay to taste the mild delights
  Of pensive Underwalden's [U] pastoral heights.
 --Is there who 'mid these awful wilds has seen                 340
  The native Genii walk the mountain green?
  Or heard, while other worlds their charms reveal,
  Soft music o'er [88] the aerial summit steal?
  While o'er the desert, answering every close,
  Rich steam of sweetest perfume comes and goes.                 345
 --And sure there is a secret Power that reigns
  Here, where no trace of man the spot profanes,
  Nought but the _chalets_, [V] flat and bare, on high
  Suspended 'mid the quiet of the sky;
  Or distant herds that pasturing upward creep,                  350
  And, not untended, climb the dangerous steep. [89]
  How still! no irreligious sound or sight
  Rouses the soul from her severe delight.
  An idle voice the sabbath region fills
  Of Deep that calls to Deep across the hills,                   355
  And with that voice accords the soothing sound [90]
  Of drowsy bells, for ever tinkling round;
  Faint wail of eagle melting into blue
  Beneath the cliffs, and pine-woods' steady _sugh_; [W]
  The solitary heifer's deepened low;                            360
  Or rumbling, heard remote, of falling snow.
  All motions, sounds, and voices, far and nigh,
  Blend in a music of tranquillity; [91]
  Save when, a stranger seen below [92] the boy
  Shouts from the echoing hills with savage joy.                 365

    When, from the sunny breast of open seas,
  And bays with myrtle fringed, the southern breeze
  Comes on to gladden April with the sight
  Of green isles widening on each snow-clad height; [93]
  When shouts and lowing herds the valley fill,                  370
  And louder torrents stun the noon-tide hill,
  [94] The pastoral Swiss begin the cliffs to scale,
  Leaving to silence the deserted vale; [95]
  And like the Patriarchs in their simple age
  Move, as the verdure leads, from stage to stage; [96]          375
  High and more high in summer's heat they go, [97]
  And hear the rattling thunder far below;
  Or steal beneath the mountains, half-deterred,
  Where huge rocks tremble to the bellowing herd. [98]

    One I behold who, 'cross the foaming flood,                  380
  Leaps with a bound of graceful hardihood;
  Another high on that green ledge;--he gained
  The tempting spot with every sinew strained; [99]
  And downward thence a knot of grass he throws,
  Food for his beasts in time of winter snows. [100]             385
 --Far different life from what Tradition hoar
  Transmits of happier lot in times of yore! [101]
  Then Summer lingered long; and honey flowed
  From out the rocks, the wild bees' safe abode: [102]
  Continual waters [103] welling cheered the waste,              390
  And plants were wholesome, now of deadly taste:
  Nor Winter yet his frozen stores had piled,
  Usurping where the fairest herbage smiled:
  Nor Hunger driven the herds from pastures bare,
  To climb the treacherous cliffs for scanty fare. [104]         395
  Then the milk-thistle flourished through the land,
  And forced the full-swoln udder to demand,
  Thrice every day, the pail and welcome hand. [105]
  Thus does the father to his children tell
  Of banished bliss, by fancy loved too well. [106]              400
  Alas! that human guilt provoked the rod [107]
  Of angry Nature to avenge her God.
  Still, Nature, ever just, to him imparts
  Joys only given to uncorrupted hearts.

    'Tis morn: with gold the verdant mountain glows;             405
  More high, the snowy peaks with hues of rose.
  Far-stretched beneath the many-tinted hills,
  A mighty waste of mist the valley fills,
  A solemn sea! whose billows wide around [108]
  Stand motionless, to awful silence bound:                      410
  Pines, on the coast, through mist their tops uprear,
  That like to leaning masts of stranded ships appear.
  A single chasm, a gulf of gloomy blue,
  Gapes in the centre of the sea--and through
  That dark mysterious gulf ascending, sound                     415
  Innumerable streams with roar profound. [109]
  Mount through the nearer vapours notes of birds,
  And merry flageolet; the low of herds,
  The bark of dogs, the heifer's tinkling bell,
  Talk, laughter, and perchance a church-tower knell: [110]      420
  Think not, the peasant from aloft has gazed
  And heard with heart unmoved, with soul unraised: [111]
  Nor is his spirit less enrapt, nor less
  Alive to independent happiness, [112]
  Then, when he lies, out-stretched, at even-tide                425
  Upon the fragrant mountain's purple side: [113]
  For as the pleasures of his simple day
  Beyond his native valley seldom stray,
  Nought round its darling precincts can he find
  But brings some past enjoyment to his mind;                    430
  While Hope, reclining upon Pleasure's urn, [114]
  Binds her wild wreaths, and whispers his return.

    Once, Man entirely free, alone and wild,
  Was blest as free--for he was Nature's child.
  He, all superior but his God disdained,                        435
  Walked none restraining, and by none restrained:
  Confessed no law but what his reason taught,
  Did all he wished, and wished but what he ought.
  As man in his primeval dower arrayed
  The image of his glorious Sire displayed,                      440
  Even so, by faithful [115] Nature guarded, here
  The traces of primeval Man appear;
  The simple [116] dignity no forms debase;
  The eye sublime, and surly lion-grace:
  The slave of none, of beasts alone the lord,                   445
  His book he prizes, nor neglects his sword; [117]
 --Well taught by that to feel his rights, prepared
  With this "the blessings he enjoys to guard." [X]

    And, as his native hills encircle ground
  For many a marvellous [118] victory renowned,                  450
  The work of Freedom daring to oppose,
  With few in arms, [Y] innumerable foes,
  When to those famous [119] fields his steps are led,
  An unknown power connects him with the dead:
  For images of other worlds are there;                          455
  Awful the light, and holy is the air.
  Fitfully, and in flashes, through his soul,
  Like sun-lit tempests, troubled transports roll;
  His bosom heaves, his Spirit towers amain, [120]
  Beyond the senses and their little reign.                      460

    And oft, when that dread vision hath past by, [121]
  He holds with God himself communion high,
  There where the peal [122] of swelling torrents fills
  The sky-roofed temple of the eternal hills;
  Or, when upon the mountain's silent brow                       465
  Reclined, he sees, above him and below,
  Bright stars of ice and azure fields of snow;
  While needle peaks of granite shooting bare
  Tremble in ever-varying tints of air.
  And when a gathering weight of shadows brown                   470
  Falls on the valleys as the sun goes down;
  And Pikes, of darkness named and fear and storms, [Z]
  Uplift in quiet their illumined forms, [123]
  In sea-like reach of prospect round him spread,
  Tinged like an angel's smile all rosy red--                   475
  Awe in his breast with holiest love unites,
  And the near heavens impart their own delights. [124]

    When downward to his winter hut he goes,
  Dear and more dear the lessening circle grows;
  That hut which on the hills so oft employs                     480
  His thoughts, the central point of all his joys. [125]
  And as a swallow, at the hour of rest,
  Peeps often ere she darts into her nest,
  So to the homestead, where the grandsire tends
  A little prattling child, he oft descends,                     485
  To glance a look upon the well-matched pair; [126]
  Till storm and driving ice blockade him there.
  There, [127] safely guarded by the woods behind,
  He hears the chiding of the baffled wind,
  Hears Winter calling all his terrors round,                    490
  And, blest within himself, he shrinks not from the sound. [128]

    Through Nature's vale his homely pleasures glide,
  Unstained by envy, discontent, and pride;
  The bound of all his vanity, to deck,
  With one bright bell, a favourite heifer's neck;               495
  Well pleased [129] upon some simple annual feast,
  Remembered half the year and hoped the rest,
  If dairy-produce, from his inner hoard,
  Of thrice ten summers dignify [130] the board.
 --Alas! in every clime a flying ray                            500
  Is all we have to cheer our wintry way;
  [131]
  And here the unwilling mind [132] may more than trace
  The general sorrows of the human race:
  The churlish gales of penury, that blow
  Cold as the north-wind o'er a waste of snow, [133]             505
  To them [134] the gentle groups of bliss deny
  That on the noon-day bank of leisure lie.
  Yet more;--compelled by Powers which only deign
  That _solitary_ man disturb their reign,
  Powers that support an unremitting [135] strife                510
  With all the tender charities of life,
  Full oft the father, when his sons have grown
  To manhood, seems their title to disown; [136]
  And from his nest [137] amid the storms of heaven
  Drives, eagle-like, those sons as he was driven;               515
  With stern composure [138] watches to the plain--
  And never, eagle-like, beholds again!

    When long familiar joys are all resigned,
  Why does their sad remembrance haunt the mind? [139]
  Lo! where through flat Batavia's willowy groves,               520
  Or by the lazy Seine, the exile roves;
  O'er the curled waters Alpine measures swell,
  And search the affections to their inmost cell;
  Sweet poison spreads along the listener's veins,
  Turning past pleasures into mortal pains; [140]                525
  Poison, which not a frame of steel can brave,
  Bows his young head with sorrow to the grave. [Aa]

    Gay lark of hope, thy silent song resume!
  Ye flattering eastern lights, once more the hills illume! [141]
  Fresh [142] gales and dews of life's delicious morn,           530
  And thou, lost fragrance of the heart, return!
  Alas! the little joy to man allowed,
  Fades like the lustre of an evening cloud; [143]
  Or like the beauty in a flower installed,
  Whose season was, and cannot be recalled.                      535
  Yet, when opprest by sickness, grief, or care,
  And taught that pain is pleasure's natural heir,
  We still confide in more than we can know;
  Death would be else the favourite friend of woe. [144]

    'Mid savage rocks, and seas of snow that shine,              540
  Between interminable tracts of pine,
  Within a temple stands an awful shrine, [145]
  By an uncertain light revealed, that falls
  On the mute Image and the troubled walls.
  Oh! give not me that eye of hard disdain                       545
  That views, undimmed, Ensiedlen's [Bb] wretched fane.
  While ghastly faces through the gloom appear, [146]
  Abortive joy, and hope that works in fear; [147]
  While prayer contends with silenced agony, [148]
  Surely in other thoughts contempt may die.                     550
  If the sad grave of human ignorance bear
  One flower of hope--oh, pass and leave it there! [Cc]

    The tall sun, pausing [149] on an Alpine spire,
  Flings o'er the wilderness a stream of fire:
  Now meet we other pilgrims ere the day [150]                   555
  Close on the remnant of their weary way;
  While they are drawing toward the sacred floor
  Where, so they fondly think, the worm shall gnaw no more. [151]
  How gaily murmur and how sweetly taste
  The fountains [Dd] reared for them [152] amid the waste!       560
  Their thirst they slake:--they wash their toil-worn feet,
  And some with tears of joy each other greet. [153]
  Yes, I must [154] see you when ye first behold
  Those holy turrets tipped with evening gold,
  In that glad moment will for you a sigh                        565
  Be heaved, of charitable sympathy; [155]
  In that glad moment when your [156] hands are prest
  In mute devotion on the thankful breast!

    Last, let us turn to Chamouny that shields [157]
  With rocks and gloomy woods [158] her fertile fields:          570
  Five streams of ice amid her cots descend,
  And with wild flowers and blooming orchards blend;--[Ee]
  A scene more fair than what the Grecian feigns
  Of purple lights and ever-vernal plains;
  Here all the seasons revel hand in hand:                       575
  'Mid lawns and shades by breezy rivulets fanned [159]
  [160] They sport beneath that mountain's matchless height [161]
  That holds no commerce with the summer night. [Ee]
  From age to age, throughout [162] his lonely bounds
  The crash of ruin fitfully resounds;                           580
  Appalling [163] havoc! but serene his brow,
  Where daylight lingers on [164] perpetual snow;
  Glitter the stars, and all is black below. [Ee]

    What marvel then if many a Wanderer sigh,
  While roars the sullen Arve in anger by, [165]                 585
  That not for thy reward, unrivall'd [166] Vale! [Ff]
  Waves the ripe harvest in the autumnal gale;
  That thou, the slave of slaves, art doomed to pine
  And droop, while no Italian arts are thine,
  To soothe or cheer, to soften or refine. [167]                 590

    Hail Freedom! whether it was mine to stray,
  With shrill winds whistling round my lonely way, [168]
  On [169] the bleak sides of Cumbria's heath-clad moors,
  Or where dank sea-weed lashes Scotland's shores;
  To scent the sweets of Piedmont's breathing rose,              595
  And orange gale that o'er Lugano blows;
  Still have I found, where Tyranny prevails,
  That virtue languishes and pleasure fails, [170]
  While the remotest hamlets blessings share
  In thy loved [171] presence known, and only there;             600
  _Heart_-blessings--outward treasures too which the eye
  Of the sun peeping through the clouds can spy,
  And every passing breeze will testify. [172]
  There, to the porch, belike with jasmine bound
  Or woodbine wreaths, a smoother path is wound; [173]           605
  The housewife there a brighter garden sees,
  Where hum on busier wing her happy bees; [174]
  On infant cheeks there fresher roses blow;
  And grey-haired men look up with livelier brow,--[175]
  To greet the traveller needing food and rest;                  610
  Housed for the night, or but a half-hour's guest. [176]

    And oh, fair France! though now the traveller sees
  Thy three-striped banner fluctuate on the breeze;[177]
  Though martial songs have banished songs of love,
  And nightingales desert the village grove, [178]               615
  Scared by the fife and rumbling drum's alarms,
  And the short thunder, and the flash of arms;
  That cease not till night falls, when far and nigh,
  Sole sound, the Sourd [Gg] prolongs his mournful cry! [179]
 --Yet, hast thou found that Freedom spreads her power          620
  Beyond the cottage-hearth, the cottage-door:
  All nature smiles, and owns beneath her eyes
  Her fields peculiar, and peculiar skies.
  Yes, as I roamed where Loiret's waters glide
  Through rustling aspens heard from side to side,               625
  When from October clouds a milder light
  Fell where the blue flood rippled into white;
  Methought from every cot the watchful bird
  Crowed with ear-piercing power till then unheard;
  Each clacking mill, that broke the murmuring streams,          630
  Rocked the charmed thought in more delightful dreams;
  Chasing those pleasant dreams, [180] the falling leaf
  Awoke a fainter sense [181] of moral grief;
  The measured echo of the distant flail
  Wound in more welcome cadence down the vale;                   635
  With more majestic course the water rolled,
  And ripening foliage shone with richer gold. [182]
 --But foes are gathering--Liberty must raise
  Red on the hills her beacon's far-seen blaze;
  Must bid the tocsin ring from tower to tower!--               640
  Nearer and nearer comes the trying hour! [183]
  Rejoice, brave Land, though pride's perverted ire
  Rouse hell's own aid, and wrap thy fields in fire:
  Lo, from the flames a great and glorious birth;
  As if a new-made heaven were hailing a new earth! [184]        645
 --All cannot be: the promise is too fair
  For creatures doomed to breathe terrestrial air:
  Yet not for this will sober reason frown
  Upon that promise, not the hope disown;
  She knows that only from high aims ensue                       650
  Rich guerdons, and to them alone are due. [185]

    Great God! by whom the strifes of men are weighed
  In an impartial balance, give thine aid
  To the just cause; and, oh! do thou preside
  Over the mighty stream now spreading wide: [Hh]                655
  So shall its waters, from the heavens supplied
  In copious showers, from earth by wholesome springs,
  Brood o'er the long-parched lands with Nile-like wings!
  And grant that every sceptred child of clay
  Who cries presumptuous, "Here the flood shall stay," [186]     660
  May in its progress see thy guiding hand,
  And cease the acknowledged purpose to withstand; [187]
  Or, swept in anger from the insulted shore,
  Sink with his servile bands, to rise no more! [188]

    To-night, my Friend, within this humble cot                  665
  Be scorn and fear and hope alike forgot [189]
  In timely sleep; and when, at break of day,
  On the tall peaks the glistening sunbeams play, [190]
  With a light heart our course we may renew,
  The first whose footsteps print the mountain dew. [191]        670



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1827.

    ... a spot of holy ground,
    By Pain and her sad family unfound,
    Sure, Nature's God that spot to man had given,
    Where murmuring rivers join the song of even;
    Where falls ...                                     1820.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

    Where the resounding power of water shakes          1820.

    Where with loud voice the power of waters shakes    1827.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

      And not unrecompensed the man shall roam,
    Who, to converse with Nature, quits his home,
    And plods o'er hills and vales his way forlorn,
    Wooing her various charms from eve to morn.              1820.

      Yet not unrecompensed the man shall roam,
    Who at the call of summer quits his home,
    And plods through some far realm o'er vale and height,
    Though seeking only holiday delight;                     1827.]


[Variant 4: Lines 13 and 14 were introduced in 1827.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

    No sad vacuities [i] his heart annoy;--
    Blows not a Zephyr but it whispers joy;
    For him lost flowers their idle sweets exhale;
    He tastes the meanest note that swells the gale;
    For him sod-seats ...                                     1815.

    Breathes not a zephyr but it whispers joy;
    For him the loneliest flowers their sweets exhale;
    He marks "the meanest note that swells the [ii] gale;"    1820.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

    And dear the green-sward to his velvet tread;    1815.]


[Variant 7:

1815.

    Whilst ...      Only in 1820.]


[Variant 8:

1820.

    ... with kindest ray
    To light him shaken by his viewless way.    1815.]


[Variant 9:

1836.

    With bashful fear no cottage children steal
    From him, a brother at the cottage meal,     1815.]


[Variant 10:

1845.

    Much wondering what sad stroke of crazing Care,
    Or desperate Love could lead a wanderer there.    1815.

    Much wondering in what fit of crazing care,
    Or desperate love, a wanderer came there.     1836.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

      Me, lured by hope her sorrows to remove,
    A heart that could not much itself approve,
    O'er Gallia's wastes of corn dejected led,
    Her road elms rustling high above my head,
    Or through her truant pathways' native charms,
    By secret villages and lonely farms,
    To where the Alps ...                           1820.

    ... could not much herself approve,             1827.

    ... lured by hope its sorrows to remove,        1832.

The lines 46, 47, were expanded in the edition of 1836 from one line in
the editions of 1820-1832.]


[Variant 12:

1836.

            I sigh at hoary Chartreuse' doom.
    Where now is fled that Power whose frown severe
    Tamed "sober Reason" till she crouched in fear?
    That breathed a death-like peace these woods around;
    The cloister startles ...                            1815.

      Even now, emerging from the forest's gloom,
    I heave a sigh at hoary Chartreuse' doom.
    Where now is fled that Power whose frown severe
    Tamed "sober Reason" till she crouched in fear?      1820.]


[Variant 13:

1836.

    That breathed a death-like silence wide around,
    Broke only by the unvaried torrent's sound,
    Or prayer-bell by the dull cicada drown'd.       1820.

The editions of 1827 and 1832 omit these lines.]


[Variant 14:

1836.

    The cloister startles at the gleam of arms,
    And Blasphemy the shuddering fane alarms;    1815.]


[Variant 15:

1793.

    That ...    1827.

The edition of 1836 returns to the text of 1793.]


[Variant 16:

1836.

    And swells the groaning torrent with his tears.    1815.

In the editions 1815-1832 lines 61, 62 followed line 66.]


[Variant 17:

1836.

    Nod the cloud-piercing pines their troubled heads,    1815.]


[Variant 18:

1836.

    The cross with hideous laughter Demons mock,
    By angels planted on the aereal rock.         1815.

    The cross, by angels on the aerial rock
    Planted, a flight of laughing demons mock.    1832.]


[Variant 19:

1836.

    ... sound ...    1815.]


[Variant 20:

1836.

    To ringing team unknown ...    1815.]


[Variant 21:

1827.

    Wild round the steeps the little pathway twines,    1815.]


[Variant 22:

1836.

    The viewless lingerer ...    1815.]


[Variant 23:

1845.

    Tracking the yellow sun from steep to steep,
    As up the opposing hills, with tortoise foot, they creep.    1815.

    And track the yellow light ...                               1836.

    ... on naked steeps
    As up the opposing hill it slowly creeps.                       C.]


[Variant 24:

1845.

    Here half a village shines, in gold arrayed,
    Bright as the moon; ...                        1815.]


[Variant 25:

1827.

    From the dark sylvan roofs the restless spire
    Inconstant glancing, mounts like springing fire.     1815.]


[Variant 26:

1836.

    ... the waves ...     1815.]


[Variant 27:

1836.

    Th' unwearied sweep of wood thy cliffs that scales;
    The never-ending waters of thy vales;                1815.]


[Variant 28:

1836.

Line 111 was previously three lines, thus--

    The cots, those dim religious groves embower,
    Or, under rocks that from the water tower
    Insinuated, sprinkling all the shore,               1815.]


[Variant 29:

1836.

    ... his ...     1815.]


[Variant 30:

1836.

    Whose flaccid sails in forms fantastic droop,
    Bright'ning the gloom where thick the forests stoop;

Only in the editions 1815 to 1832.]


[Variant 31:

1827.

    ... like swallows' nests that cleave on high;    1815.]


[Variant 32:

1827.

    While Evening's solemn bird melodious weeps,
    Heard, by star-spotted bays, beneath the steeps;

Only in the editions of 1815 and 1820.]


[Variant 33:

1836.

   --Thy lake, mid smoking woods, that blue and grey
    Gleams, streaked or dappled, hid from morning's ray    1815.

    As beautiful the flood where blue or grey
    Dappled, or streaked, as hid from morning's ray.          C.]


[Variant 34:

1836.

    ... to fold    1815.]


[Variant 35:

1836.

    From thickly-glittering spires the matin bell
    Calling the woodman from his desert cell,
    A summons to the sound of oars, that pass,
    Spotting the steaming deeps, to early mass;
    Slow swells the service o'er the water born,
    While fill each pause the ringing woods of morn.    1815.

    Calls forth the woodman with its cheerful knell.       C.]


[Variant 36: This couplet was first added in 1845.]


[Variant 37:

1845.

    Farewell those forms that in thy noon-tide shade,
    Rest, near their little plots of wheaten glade;    1820.

    Ye lovely forms that in the noontide shade
    Rest near their little plots of wheaten glade.        C.]


[Variant 38:

1845.

    Those charms that bind ...    1820.]


[Variant 39:

1836.

    And winds, ...     1820.]


[Variant 40:

1836.

      Yet arts are thine that soothe the unquiet heart,
    And smiles to Solitude and Want impart.
    I lov'd, 'mid thy most desart woods astray,
    With pensive step to measure my slow way,
    By lonely, silent cottage-doors to roam,
    The far-off peasant's day-deserted home.    1820.

    I loved by silent cottage-doors to roam,
    The far-off peasant's day-deserted home;    1827.

These two lines take the place of the second and third couplets of the
1820 text quoted above.]


[Variant 41:

1836.

    Once did I pierce to where a cabin stood;
    The red-breast peace had buried it in wood,     1820.

    And once I pierced the mazes of a wood,
    Where, far from public haunt, a cabin stood;    1827.]


[Variant 42:

1836.

    There, by the door a hoary-headed Sire
    Touched with his withered hand an ancient lyre;    1820.]


[Variant 43:

1836.

This and the following line were expanded from

    Beneath an old-grey oak, as violets lie,    1820.]


[Variant 44:

1836.

    ... joined the holy sound;    1820.]


[Variant 45:

1836.

    While ...    1820.]


[Variant 46:

1845.

    Bend o'er th' abyss, the else impervious gloom     1820.

    Hang o'er th' abyss:--...                         1827.

    ... the abyss:--...                               1832.]


[Variant 47:

1836.

    Freshening the waste of sand with shades and springs.
   --_She_, solitary, through the desart drear
    Spontaneous wanders, hand in hand with Fear.       1820.

    By choice or doom a gipsy wanders here,
    Companionless, or hand in hand with fear;
    Lo! where she sits beneath yon shaggy rock,
    A cowering shape half-seen through curling smoke.    MS.]


[Variant 48:

1836.

    The Grison gypsey here her tent hath placed,
    Sole human tenant of the piny waste;
    Her tawny skin, dark eyes, and glossy locks,
    Bend o'er the smoke that curls beneath the rocks.[iii]    1820.]


[Variant 49:

1845.

Lines 179-185 were substituted in 1845 for

      A giant moan along the forest swells
    Protracted, and the twilight storm foretels,
    And, ruining from the cliffs, their deafening load
    Tumbles,--the wildering Thunder slips abroad;
    On the high summits Darkness comes and goes,
    Hiding their fiery clouds, their rocks, and snows;
    The torrent, traversed by the lustre broad,
    Starts like a horse beside the flashing road;
    In the roofed bridge, at that terrific hour,
    She seeks a shelter from the battering show'r.
   --Fierce comes the river down; the crashing wood
    Gives way, and half it's pines torment the flood;
    [iv] Fearful, beneath, the Water-spirits call,
    And the bridge vibrates, tottering to its fall.       1820.

      When rueful moans along the forest swell
    Protracted, and the twilight storm foretel,
    And, headlong from the cliffs, a deafening load
    Tumbles,--and wildering thunder slips abroad;
    When on the summits Darkness comes and goes,
    Hiding their fiery clouds, their rocks, and snows;
    And the fierce torrent, from the lustre broad,
    Starts, like a horse beside the flashing road--
    She seeks a covert from the battering shower
    In the roofed bridge; the bridge, in that dread hour,
    Itself all quaking at the torrent's power.            1836.]


[Variant 50:

1845.

Lines 186-195 were substituted in 1845 for

     --Heavy, and dull, and cloudy is the night;
    No star supplies the comfort of it's light,
    Glimmer the dim-lit Alps, dilated, round,
    And one sole light shifts in the vale profound; [s1]
    While, [s2] opposite, the waning moon hangs still,
    And red, above her [s3] melancholy hill.
    By the deep quiet gloom appalled, she sighs, [s4]
    Stoops her sick head, and shuts her weary eyes.
    She hears, upon the mountain forest's brow,
    The death-dog, howling loud and long, below;
   --Breaking th' ascending roar of desert floods,
    And insect buzz, that stuns the sultry woods, [s5]
    On viewless fingers [s6] counts the valley-clock,
    Followed by drowsy crow of midnight cock.
   --Bursts from the troubled larch's giant boughs
    The pie, and, chattering, breaks the night's repose. [s7]
    The dry leaves stir as with the serpent's walk,
    And, far beneath, Banditti voices talk;
    Behind her hill, [s8] the Moon, all crimson, rides,
    And his red eyes the slinking Water hides.
   --Vexed by the darkness, from the piny gulf
    Ascending, nearer howls the famished wolf, [s9]
    While thro' the stillness scatters wild dismay
    Her babe's small cry, that leads him to his prey.    1820.

s1-s9: see Sub-Variants below. txt. Ed.]


[Variant 51:

1836.

    Now, passing Urseren's open vale serene,
    Her quiet streams, and hills of downy green,
    Plunge with the Russ embrowned by Terror's breath,
    Where danger roofs the narrow walks of death;       1815.

    Plunge where the Reuss with fearless might has rent
    His headlong way along a dark descent.                MS.

In the edition of 1836 these two couplets of 1815 were compressed into
one, and in that edition lines 200-201 preceded lines 198-199. They were
transposed in 1840.]


[Variant 52:

1836.

    By floods, that, thundering from their dizzy height,
    Swell more gigantic on the stedfast sight;
    Black drizzling crags, that beaten by the din,
    Vibrate, as if a voice complained within;
    Bare steeps, where Desolation stalks afraid,
    Unstedfast, by a blasted yew unstayed;
    By cells whose image, trembling as he prays,
    Awe-struck, the kneeling peasant scarce surveys;
    Loose hanging rocks the Day's bless'd eye that hide,
    And crosses reared to Death on every side,
    Which with cold kiss Devotion planted near,
    And bending water'd with the human tear;
    That faded "silent" from her upward eye,
    Unmoved with each rude form of Danger nigh,           1815.]


[Variant 53:

1836.

    On as we move a softer prospect opes,
    Calm huts, and lawns between, and sylvan slopes.    1815.]


[Variant 54:

1845.

    While mists, suspended on the expiring gale,
    Moveless o'er-hang the deep secluded vale,    1815.

    Where mists,                                  1836.

    Where mists suspended on the evening gale,
    Spread roof-like o'er a deep secluded vale,      C.

    Given to clear view beneath a hoary veil
    Of mists suspended on the evening gale.         MS.]


[Variant 55:

1836.

    The beams of evening, slipping soft between,
    Light up of tranquil joy a sober scene.    1815.

    Gently illuminate a sober scene;           1827.]


[Variant 56: In the editions 1815-1832 ll. 214, 215 follow, instead of
preceding, ll. 216-219.]


[Variant 57:

1845.

    On the low brown wood-huts delighted sleep
    Along the brightened gloom reposing deep.         1815.

    Here, on the brown wood-cottages they sleep,
    There, over lawns and sloping woodlands creep.    1836.

    There, over lawn or sloping pasture creep.           C.]


[Variant 58:

1845.

    Winding its dark-green wood and emerald glade,
    The still vale lengthens underneath the shade;
    While in soft gloom the scattering bowers recede,
    Green dewy lights adorn the freshened mead,          1815.

    Winding its darksome wood and emerald glade,
    The still vale lengthens underneath the shade
    Of low-hung vapour: on the freshened mead
    The green light sparkles;--the dim bowers recede.    1836.]


[Variant 59:

1836.

    ... drizzling ...    1815.]


[Variant 60:

1845.

    ... my soul awake,
    Lo! Fear looks silent down on Uri's lake;
    Where by the unpathwayed margin still and dread
    Was never heard the plodding peasant's tread:    1815.]


[Variant 61:

1845.

    Tower like a wall the naked rocks, or reach
    Far o'er the secret water dark with beech;        1815.

    Tower-like rise up the naked rocks, or stretch    1836.]


[Variant 62:

1845.

    More high, to where creation seems to end,
    Shade above shade the desert pines ascend.    1815.

    ... the aerial pines ...                      1820.

    Shade above shade, the aerial pines ascend,
    Nor stop but where creation seems to end.     1836.]


[Variant 63:

1845.

(Compressing eight lines into four.)

    Yet, with his infants, man undaunted creeps
    And hangs his small wood-hut upon the steeps,
    Where'er, below, amid the savage scene
    Peeps out a little speck of smiling green.
    A garden-plot the mountain air perfumes,
    Mid the dark pines a little orchard blooms;
    A zig-zag path from the domestic skiff,
    Threading the painful crag, surmounts the cliff.     1815.

    ... wood-cabin on the steeps.                        1820.

    ... the desert air perfumes,                         1820.

    Thridding the painful crag, ...                      1832.

    Yet, wheresoe'er amid the savage scene
    Peeps out a little spot of smiling green,
    Man with his babes undaunted thither creeps,
    And hangs his small wood-hut upon the steeps.
    A garden-plot ...                                    1836.]


[Variant 64:

1845.

   --Before those hermit doors, that never know    1815.

   --Before those lonesome doors, ...              1836.]


[Variant 65:

1845.

    The grassy seat beneath their casement shade
    The pilgrim's wistful eye hath never stayed.     1815.

    The shady porch ne'er offered a cool seat
    To pilgrims overpowered by summer's heat.        1836.]

[Variants 66 and 67: See Appendix III.--Ed.]


[Variant 68:

1845.

Lines 246 to 253 were previously:

   --There, did the iron Genius not disdain
    The gentle Power that haunts the myrtle plain,
    There might the love-sick Maiden sit, and chide
    Th' insuperable rocks and severing tide,
    There watch at eve her Lover's sun-gilt sail
    Approaching, and upbraid the tardy gale,
    There list at midnight, till is heard no more,
    Below, the echo of his parting oar,
    There hang in fear, when growls the frozen stream, [v]
    To guide his dangerous tread, the taper's gleam.     1815.

    There might the maiden chide, in love-sick mood,
    The insuperable rocks and severing flood;            1836.

    At midnight listen till his parting oar,
    And its last echo, can be heard no more.             1836.

    Yet tender thoughts dwell there, no solitude
    Hath power youth's natural feelings to exclude;
    There doth the maiden watch her lover's sail
    Approaching, and upbraid the tardy gale.                C.]


[Variant 69:

1845.

      Mid stormy vapours ever driving by,
    Where ospreys, cormorants, and herons cry;          1815.

      Where ospreys, cormorants, and herons cry,
    'Mid stormy vapours ever driving by,                1836.]


[Variant 70:

1836.

    Where hardly given the hopeless waste to cheer,
    Denied the bread of life the foodful ear,           1815.

    Hovering o'er rugged wastes too bleak to rear
    That common growth of earth, the foodful ear;       1820.]


[Variant 71:

1820.

    Dwindles the pear on autumn's latest spray,
    And apple sickens pale in summer's ray;             1815.]


[Variant 72:

1845.

    Ev'n here Content has fixed her smiling reign     1815.]


[Variant 73:

1845.

    And often grasps her sword, and often eyes:
    Her crest a bough of Winter's bleakest pine,
    Strange "weeds" and alpine plants her helm entwine,
    And wildly-pausing oft she hangs aghast,
    While thrills the "Spartan fife" between the blast.      1815.

    Flowers of the loftiest Alps her helm entwine;
    And, wildly pausing, oft she hangs aghast,
    As thrills ...                                           1836.

    And oft at Fancy's call she stands aghast,
    As if some old Swiss air had checked her haste,
    Or thrill of Spartan fife were caught between the blast.    C.]


[Variant 74:

1845.

    'Tis storm; and, hid in mist from hour to hour,     1815.]


[Variant 75:

1845.

    Glances the fire-clad eagle's wheeling form;     1815.

    ... glorious form;                               1836.]


[Variant 76:

1845.

    Wide o'er the Alps a hundred streams unfold,     1815.

    Those eastern cliffs ...                         1836.]


[Variant 77:

1845.

    ... strives to shun
    The west ...        1815.

    ... tries to shun
    The _west_, ...     1836.]


[Variant 78:

1845.

    Where in a mighty crucible expire
    The mountains, glowing hot, like coals of fire.     1815.]


[Variant 79:

1836.

    While burn in his full eyes the glorious tears.     1820.]


[Variant 80:

1836.

    Exalt, and agitate ...     1820.]


[Variant 81:

1836.

    On Zutphen's plain; or where, with soften'd gaze,
    The old grey stones the plaided chief surveys;
    Can guess the high resolve, the cherished pain
    Of him whom passion rivets to the plain,     1820.]


[Variant 82:

1836.

    And watch, from pike to pike, amid the sky
    Small as a bird the chamois-chaser fly,    1820.]


[Variant 83:

1836.

    Thro' worlds where Life, and Sound, and Motion sleep;
    Where Silence still her death-like reign extends,
    Save when the startling cliff unfrequent rends:
    In the deep snow the mighty ruin drowned,
    Mocks the dull ear ...                     1820.]


[Variant 84:

1836.

    While the near moon, that coasts the vast profound,
    Wheels pale and silent her diminished round,        1820.]


[Variant 85:

1827.

    Flying more fleet than vision can pursue!           1820.]


[Variant 86:

1836.

    Then with Despair's whole weight his spirits sink,
    No bread to feed him, and the snow his drink,
    While, ere his eyes ...                             1820.]


[Variant 87:

1836.

    Hence shall we turn where, heard with fear afar,    1820.]


[Variant 88:

1836.

    ... from ...    1820.]


[Variant 89:

1836.

    Nought but the herds that pasturing upward creep,
    Hung dim-discover'd from the dangerous steep,
    Or summer hamlet, flat and bare, on high
    Suspended, mid the quiet of the sky.    1815.]


[Variant 90:

1836.

    Broke only by the melancholy sound    1815.]


[Variant 91: The two previous lines were added in 1836.]


[Variant 92:

1832.

    Save that, the stranger seen below, ...    1815.]


[Variant 93:

1836.

    When warm from myrtle bays and tranquil seas,
    Comes on, to whisper hope, the vernal breeze,
    When hums the mountain bee in May's glad ear,
    And emerald isles to spot the heights appear,    1815.]


[Variant 94:

    When fragrant scents beneath th' enchanted tread
    Spring up, his choicest wealth around him spread,

Inserted in the editions 1815 to 1832.]


[Variant 95:

1836.

    The pastoral Swiss begins the cliffs to scale,
    To silence leaving the deserted vale,          1815]


[Variant 96:

1836.

    Mounts, where the verdure leads, from stage to stage,
    And pastures on, as in the Patriarch's age:    1815.]


[Variant 97:

1836.

    O'er lofty heights serene and still they go,    1815.]


[Variant 98:

1836.

(Omitting the first of the two following couplets.)

    They cross the chasmy torrent's foam-lit bed,
    Rocked on the dizzy larch's narrow tread;
    Or steal beneath loose mountains, half deterr'd,
    That sigh and shudder to the lowing herd.        1815.]


[Variant 99: This couplet was added in the edition of 1836.]


[Variant 100:

1836.

Lines 380-385 were previously:

   --I see him, up the midway cliff he creeps
    To where a scanty knot of verdure peeps,
    Thence down the steep a pile of grass he throws,
    The fodder of his herds in winter snows.    1815.]


[Variant 101:

1836.

    ... to what tradition hoar
    Transmits of days more blest ...    1815.]


[Variant 102:

1845.

    Then Summer lengthened out his season bland,
    And with rock-honey flowed the happy land.      1815.

    Then Summer lingered long; and honey flowed
    Out of the rocks, the wild bees' safe abode.    1836.]


[Variant 103:

1836.

    Continual fountains ...     1815.]


[Variant 104:

1836.

    Nor Hunger forced the herds from pastures bare
    For scanty food the treacherous cliffs to dare.    1815.]


[Variant 105:

1836.

    Then the milk-thistle bade those herds demand
    Three times a day the pail and welcome hand.       1815.]


[Variant 106:

1836.

    Thus does the father to his sons relate,
    On the lone mountain top, their changed estate.     1815.]


[Variant 107:

1836.

    But human vices have provoked the rod     1815.

In the editions 1815-1832 this and the following line preceded lines
399-400. They took their final position in the edition of 1836.]


[Variant 108:

1836.

    ... whose vales and mountains round     1820.]


[Variant 109:

1836.

(Compressing eight lines into six.)

    ... to awful silence bound.
    A gulf of gloomy blue, that opens wide
    And bottomless, divides the midway tide.
    Like leaning masts of stranded ships appear
    The pines that near the coast their summits rear;
    Of cabins, woods, and lawns a pleasant shore
    Bounds calm and clear the chaps still and hoar;
    Loud thro' that midway gulf ascending, sound
    Unnumber'd streams with hollow roar profound:     1820.]


[Variant 110:

1836.

    Mount thro' the nearer mist the chaunt of birds,
    And talking voices, and the low of herds,
    The bark of dogs, the drowsy tinkling bell,
    And wild-wood mountain lutes of saddest swell.    1820.]


[Variant 111:

1836.

    Think not, suspended from the cliff on high,
    He looks below with undelighted eye.         1820.]


[Variant 112: This couplet was added in the edition of 1836.]


[Variant 113:

1836.

   --No vulgar joy is his, at even tide
    Stretch'd on the scented mountain's purple side.    1820.]


[Variant 114:

1836.

    While Hope, that ceaseless leans on Pleasure's urn,    1820.]


[Variant 115:

1836.

    ... by vestal ...    1820.]


[Variant 116:

1836.

    ... native ...    1820.]


[Variant 117:

1832.

    He marches with his flute, his book, and sword;    1820.]


[Variant 118:

1845.

    ... wonderous ...    1820.]


[Variant 119:

1840.

    ... glorious ...    1820.]


[Variant 120:

1836.

    Uncertain thro' his fierce uncultured soul
    Like lighted tempests troubled transports roll;
    To viewless realms his Spirit towers amain,    1820.]


[Variant 121:

1836.

    And oft, when pass'd that solemn vision by,    1820.]


[Variant 122:

1836.

    Where the dread peal ...    1820.]


[Variant 123:

1836.

   --When the Sun bids the gorgeous scene farewell,
    Alps overlooking Alps their state up-swell;
    Huge Pikes of Darkness named, of Fear and Storms,
    Lift, all serene, their still, illumined forms,    1820.]


[Variant 124:

1845.

   --Great joy, by horror tam'd, dilates his heart,
    And the near heavens their own delights impart.    1820.

In the editions 1820-1832 this couplet preceded the four lines above
quoted.

    Fear in his breast with holy love unites,
    And the near heavens impart their own delights.    1836.]


[Variant 125:

1836.

    That hut which from the hills his eyes employs
    So oft, the central point of all his joys,    1815.

    ... his eye ...                               1832.]


[Variant 126:

1836

    And as a swift, by tender cares opprest,
    Peeps often ere she dart into her nest,
    So to the untrodden floor, where round him looks
    His father, helpless as the babe he rocks,
    Oft he descends to nurse the brother pair,    1820.]


[Variant 127:

1820.

    Where, ...    1815.]


[Variant 128:

1836.

    Rush down the living rocks with whirlwind sound.    1815.]


[Variant 129:

1820.

    Content ...    1815. ]


[Variant 130:

1836.

    ... consecrate ...    1815.]


[Variant 131: The following lines were erased in 1836, and in all
subsequent editions:

    "Here," cried a swain, whose venerable head
    Bloom'd with the snow-drops of Man's narrow bed,
    Last night, while by his dying fire, as clos'd
    The day, in luxury my limbs repos'd,
    Here Penury oft from misery's mount will guide
    Ev'n to the summer door his icy tide,
    And here the avalanche of Death destroy
    The little cottage of domestic Joy.                1793.]

    ... a Swain, upon whose hoary head
    The "blossoms of the grave" were thinly spread,    1820.

    ... a thoughtful Swain, upon whose head    1827.]


[Variant 132:

1836.

    But, ah! the unwilling mind ...    1820.]


[Variant 133:

1836.

    The churlish gales, that unremitting blow
    Cold from necessity's continual snow,    1820.]


[Variant 134:

1836.

    To us ...    1820.]


[Variant 135:

1836.

    ... a never-ceasing ...    1820.]


[Variant 136:

1836.

    The father, as his sons of strength become
    To pay the filial debt, for food to roam,    1820.]


[Variant 137:

1836.

    From his bare nest ...    1820.]


[Variant 138:

1836.

    His last dread pleasure! watches ...    1820.]


[Variant 139:

1836.

    When the poor heart has all its joys resigned,
    Why does their sad remembrance cleave behind?    1820.]


[Variant 140:

1836.

    Soft o'er the waters mournful measures swell,
    Unlocking tender thought's "memorial cell";
    Past pleasures are transformed to mortal pains
    And poison spreads along the listener's veins.     1820.

    While poison ...                                   1827.]


[Variant 141:

1836.

    Fair smiling lights the purpled hills illume!     1815.]


[Variant 142:

1836.

    Soft ...    1815.]


[Variant 143:

1836.

    Soon flies the little joy to man allowed,
    And grief before him travels like a cloud:    1815.]


[Variant 144:

1836. (Expanding four lines into six.)

    For come Diseases on, and Penury's rage,
    Labour, and Care, and Pain, and dismal Age,
    Till, Hope-deserted, long in vain his breath
    Implores the dreadful untried sleep of Death.     1815.]


[Variant 145:

1836.

    A Temple stands; which holds an awful shrine,    1815.]


[Variant 146:

1836.

    Pale, dreadful faces round the Shrine appear,    1815.]


[Variant 147:

1836. After this line the editions of 1815-1832 have the following
couplet:

    While strives a secret Power to hush the crowd,
    Pain's wild rebellious burst proclaims her rights aloud,

and this is followed by lines 545-6 of the final text.]


[Variant 148:

1836.

From 1815 to 1832, the following two couplets followed line 546. The
first of these was withdrawn in 1836.

    Mid muttering prayers all sounds of torment meet,
    Dire clap of hands, distracted chafe of feet;
    While loud and dull ascends the weeping cry,
    Surely in other thoughts contempt may die.    1815.]


[Variant 149:

1836.

   --The tall Sun, tiptoe ...    1820.]


[Variant 150:

1836.

    At such an hour there are who love to stray,
    And meet the advancing Pilgrims ere the day    1820.

    Now let us meet the Pilgrims ere the day
    Close on the remnant of their weary way;       1827.]


[Variant 151:

1836.

    For ye are drawing tow'rd that sacred floor,
    Where the charmed worm of pain shall gnaw no more.    1820.

    While they are drawing toward the sacred floor        1827.]


[Variant 152:

1827.

    ... for you ...    1820.]


[Variant 153:

1836.

   --Now with a tearful kiss each other greet,
    Nor longer naked be your toil-worn feet,                1820.

    There some with tearful kiss each other greet,
    And some, with reverence, wash their toil-worn feet.    1827.]


[Variant 154:

1836.

    Yes I will see you when you first behold    1820.

    ... ye ...                                  1827.]


[Variant 155: This couplet was added in 1836.]


[Variant 156:

1836.

    ... the hands ...    1820.]


[Variant 157:

1836.

    Last let us turn to where Chamouny shields,    1820.]


[Variant 158:

1827.

    Bosomed in gloomy woods, ...    1820.]


[Variant 159:

1836.

    Here lawns and shades by breezy rivulets fann'd,
    Here all the Seasons revel hand in hand.         1820.]


[Variant 160:

1836.

   --Red stream the cottage-lights; the landscape fades,
    Erroneous wavering mid the twilight shades.

Inserted in the editions 1820 to 1832.]


[Variant 161:

1836.

    Alone ascends that Mountain named of white,    1820.

    Alone ascends that Hill of matchless height,    1827.]


[Variant 162:

1836.

    ... amid ...    1820.]


[Variant 163:

1836.

    Mysterious ...    1820.]


[Variant 164:

1836.

    ... 'mid ...    1820.]


[Variant 165:

1836.

    At such an hour I heaved a pensive sigh,
    When roared the sullen Arve in anger by,    1820.]


[Variant 166:

1836.

    ... delicious ...    1820.]


[Variant 167:

1836.

    Hard lot!--for no Italian arts are thine
    To cheat, or chear, to soften, or refine.    1820.

    To soothe or cheer, ...                      1827.]


[Variant 168:

1836.

    Beloved Freedom! were it mine to stray,
    With shrill winds roaring ...               1820.]


[Variant 169:

1836.

    O'er ...    1820.]


[Variant 170:

1836.

(Compressing four lines into two.)

    ... o'er Lugano blows;
    In the wide ranges of many a varied round,
    Fleet as my passage was, I still have found
    That where proud courts their blaze of gems display,
    The lilies of domestic joy decay,                     1820.

    That where despotic courts their gems display,        1827.]


[Variant 171:

1836.

    In thy dear ...    1820.]


[Variant 172: The previous three lines were added in the edition of 1836.]


[Variant 173:

1836.

    The casement's shed more luscious woodbine binds,
    And to the door a neater pathway winds;           1820.]


[Variant 174:

1836.

(Compressing six lines into two.)

    At early morn, the careful housewife, led
    To cull her dinner from its garden bed,
    Of weedless herbs a healthier prospect sees,
    While hum with busier joy her happy bees;
    In brighter rows her table wealth aspires,
    And laugh with merrier blaze her evening fires;    1820.]


[Variant 175:

1836.

    Her infants' cheeks with fresher roses glow,
    And wilder graces sport around their brow;         1820.]


[Variant 176:

1836.

(Compressing four lines into two.)

    By clearer taper lit, a cleanlier board
    Receives at supper hour her tempting hoard;
    The chamber hearth with fresher boughs is spread,
    And whiter is the hospitable bed.                  1820.]


[Variant 177:

1845.

(Compressing four lines into two.)

      And oh, fair France! though now along the shade
    Where erst at will the grey-clad peasant strayed,
    Gleam war's discordant garments through the trees,
    And the red banner mocks the froward breeze;                1820.

    ... discordant vestments through the trees,
    And the red banner fluctuates in the breeze;                1827.

    ... though in the rural shade
    Where at his will, so late, the grey-clad peasant strayed,
    Now, clothed in war's discordant garb, he sees
    The three-striped banner fluctuate on the breeze;           1836.]


[Variant 178:

1836.

    Though now no more thy maids their voices suit
    To the low-warbled breath of twilight lute,
    And, heard the pausing village hum between,
    No solemn songstress lull the fading green,        1820.

    Though martial songs have banish'd songs of love,
    And nightingales forsake the village grove,        1827.

(Compressing the four lines of 1820 into two.)]


[Variant 179:

1836.

    While, as Night bids the startling uproar die,
    Sole sound, the Sourd renews his mournful cry!     1820.]


[Variant 180:

1836.

    Chasing those long long dreams, ...                1820.]


[Variant 181:

1845.

    ... fainter pang ...    1820.]


[Variant 182:

1836.

    A more majestic tide [vi] the water roll'd,
    And glowed the sun-gilt groves in richer gold.    1820.]


[Variant 183:

1836.

(Compressing six lines into four.)

   --Though Liberty shall soon, indignant, raise
    Red on the hills his beacon's comet blaze;
    Bid from on high his lonely cannon sound,
    And on ten thousand hearths his shout rebound;
    His larum-bell from village-tower to tower
    Swing on the astounded ear its dull undying roar;    1820.]


[Variant 184:

1836.

    Yet, yet rejoice, though Pride's perverted ire
    Rouze Hell's own aid, and wrap thy hills on fire!
    Lo! from the innocuous flames, a lovely birth,
    With its own Virtues springs another earth:          1820.]


[Variant 185:

1836.

Lines 646-651 were previously

    Nature, as in her prime, her virgin reign
    Begins, and Love and Truth compose her train;
    While, with a pulseless hand, and stedfast gaze,
    Unbreathing Justice her still beam surveys.          1820.]


[Variant 186:

1836.

(Expanding eight lines into nine.)

      Oh give, great God, to Freedom's waves to ride
    Sublime o'er Conquest, Avarice, and Pride,
    To sweep where Pleasure decks her guilty bowers
    And dark Oppression builds her thick-ribbed towers!
   --Give them, beneath their breast while gladness springs
    To brood the nations o'er with Nile-like wings;
    And grant that every sceptred Child of clay,
    Who cries, presumptuous, "here their tides shall stay,"    1820.]


[Variant 187: This couplet was added in 1836.]


[Variant 188:

1836.

    Swept in their anger from the affrighted shore,
    With all his creatures sink--to rise no more!    1820.]


[Variant 189:

1845.

    Be the dead load of mortal ills forgot!     1820

    Be fear and joyful hope alike forgot        1836.]


[Variant 190: This couplet was added in 1827.]


[Variant 191:

1836.

    Renewing, when the rosy summits glow
    At morn, our various journey, sad and slow.          1820.

    With lighter heart our course we may renew,
    The first whose footsteps print the mountain dew.    1827.]



       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-VARIANTS


[Sub-Variant 1:

    A single taper in the vale profound
    Shifts, while the Alps dilated glimmer round;    1832.]


[Sub-Variant 2:

    And, ...    1832.]


[Sub-Variant 3:

    ... above yon ...     1836.]


[Sub-Variant 4:

    By the deep gloom appalled, the Vagrant sighs,    1836.]


[Sub-Variant 5: This couplet was cancelled in the edition of 1827.]


[Sub-Variant 6:

    Or on her fingers ...    1836.]


[Sub-Variant 7: This couplet was withdrawn in 1827.]


[Sub-Variant 8:

    Behind the hill ...     1836.]


[Sub-Variant 9:

    Near and yet nearer, from the piny gulf
    Howls, by the darkness vexed, the famished wolf,    1836.]


       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES


[Footnote A: See note to the "Juvenile Pieces" in the edition of 1836
(p. 1).--Ed.]


[Footnote B: There is something characteristic in Wordsworth's
addressing an intimate travelling companion in this way. S. T. C., or
Charles Lamb, would have written, as we do, "My dear Jones"; but
Wordsworth addressed his friend as "Dear Sir," and described his sister
as "a Young Lady," and as a "Female Friend."--Ed.]


[Footnote C: In a small pocket copy of the 'Orlando Furioso' of
Ariosto--now in the possession of the poet's grandson, Mr. Gordon
Wordsworth--of which the title-page is torn away, the following is
written on the first page, "My companion in the Alps with Jones. W.
Wordsworth:" also "W. W. to D. W." (He had given it to his sister
Dorothy.) On the last page is written, "I carried this Book with me in
my pedestrian tour in the Alps with Jones. W. Wordsworth." Dorothy
Wordsworth gave this interesting relic to Miss Quillinan, from whose
library it passed to that of its present owner.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: By an evident error, corrected in the first reprint of this
edition (1840). See p. 79.--Ed. [the end of the introductory text to
'Guilt and Sorrow', the next poem in this text.]]


[Footnote E: See Addison's 'Cato', Act 1. Scene i., l. 171:

  Blesses his stars, and thinks it luxury.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: The lyre of Memnon is reported to have emitted melancholy
or chearful tones, as it was touched by the sun's evening or morning
rays.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote G:  Compare Pope's 'Windsor Forest', ll. 129, 130;

  He lifts the tube, and levels with his eye:
  Straight a short thunder breaks the frozen sky:

Ed.]


[Footnote H: Alluding to crosses seen on the tops of the spiry rocks of
the Chartreuse, which have every appearance of being inaccessible.--W.
W. 1793.]


[Footnote J: Compare Milton's 'Ode on the Nativity', stanza xx.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: Names of rivers at the Chartreuse.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote L: Name of one of the valleys of the Chartreuse.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote M: The river along whose banks you descend in crossing the
Alps by the Simplon Pass---W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote N: Most of the bridges among the Alps are of wood and covered:
these bridges have a heavy appearance, and rather injure the effect of
the scenery in some places.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote P: The Catholic religion prevails here; these cells are, as is
well known, very common in the Catholic countries, planted, like the
Roman tombs, along the roadside.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote Q: Crosses commemorative of the deaths of travellers by the
fall of snow and other accidents very common along this dreadful
road.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote R: The houses in the more retired Swiss valleys are all built
of wood.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote S: See Burns's 'Postscript' to his 'Cry and Prayer':

  And when he fa's,
His latest draught o' breathin' leaves him
  In faint huzzas.

Ed.]


[Footnote T: For most of the images in the next sixteen verses I am
indebted to M. Raymond's interesting observations annexed to his
translation of Coxe's 'Tour in Switzerland'.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote U: The people of this Canton are supposed to be of a more
melancholy disposition than the other inhabitants of the Alps: this, if
true, may proceed from their living more secluded.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote V: This picture is from the middle region of the Alps.--W. W.
1815. _Chalets_ are summer huts for the Swiss herdsmen.--W. W. 1836.]


[Footnote W: Sugh, a Scotch word expressive of the sound of the wind
through the trees.--W. W. 1793.

It may be as well to add that, in this Scotch word, the "gh" is
pronounced; so that, as used colloquially, the word could never rhyme
with "blue."--Ed.]


[Footnote X: See Smollett's 'Ode to Leven Water' in 'Humphry Clinker',
and compare 'The Italian Itinerant and the Swiss Goatherd', in
"Memorials of a Tour on the Continent" in 1820, part ii. 1.--Ed.]


[Footnote Y: Alluding to several battles which the Swiss in very small
numbers have gained over their oppressors the house of Austria; and in
particular, to one fought at Naeffels near Glarus, where three hundred
and thirty men defeated an army of between fifteen and twenty thousand
Austrians. Scattered over the valley are to be found eleven stones, with
this inscription, 1388, the year the battle was fought, marking out as I
was told upon the spot, the several places where the Austrians
attempting to make a stand were repulsed anew.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote Z: As Schreck-Horn, the pike of terror. Wetter-Horn, the pike
of storms, etc., etc.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote Aa: The effect of the famous air called in French Ranz des
Vaches upon the Swiss troops.--W. W. 1793.]


[Footnote Bb: This shrine is resorted to, from a hope of relief, by
multitudes, from every corner of the Catholick world, labouring under
mental or bodily afflictions.--W. W. 1793.]

[Footnote Cc: Compare the Stanzas 'Composed in one of the Catholic
Cantons', in the "Memorials of a Tour on the Continent" (1820), which
refer to Einsiedlen.--Ed.]


[Footnote Dd: Rude fountains built and covered with sheds for the
accommodation of the pilgrims, in their ascent of the mountain.--W. W.
1793.]


[Footnote Ee: Compare Coleridge's 'Hymn before Sun-rise, in the Vale of
Chamouni':

  And you, ye five wild torrents fiercely glad!
  ...
  ... Who, with living flowers
  Of loveliest blue, spread garlands at your feet?
  ...
  O struggling with the darkness all the night,
  And visited all night by troops of stars,
  ...
  The Arve and Arveiron at thy base
  Rave ceaselessly;

Compare also Shelley's 'Mont Blanc'.--Ed.]


[Footnote Ff: See note on Coleridge's 'Hymn before Sun-rise' on previous
page.--Ed.[in Footnote Ff directly above]]


[Footnote Gg: An insect so called, which emits a short, melancholy cry,
heard, at the close of the summer evenings, on the banks of the
Loire.--W. W, 1793.]


[Footnote Hh: The duties upon many parts of the French rivers were so
exorbitant that the poorer people, deprived of the benefit of water
carriage, were obliged to transport their goods by land.--W. W. 1793.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTES


[Sub-Footnote i: In the edition of 1815, the 28 lines, from "No sad
vacuities" to "a wanderer came there," are entitled "Pleasures of the
Pedestrian."--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote ii: See 'Ode on the Pleasure arising from Vicissitude', l.
54:

  The meanest floweret of the vale,
  The simplest note that swells the gale.

Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote iii: In the editions of 1820 to 1832 the four lines
beginning "The Grison gypsey," etc., precede those beginning "The mind
condemned," etc.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote iv: In the edition of 1793 Wordsworth put the following
note:

  "Red came the river down, and loud, and oft
  The angry Spirit of the water shriek'd."

(HOME'S _Douglas_.)

See Act III. l. 86; or p. 32 in the edition of 1757.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote v: This and the following line are only in the editions of
1815 and 1820.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote vi: Compare the Sonnet entitled 'The Author's Voyage down
the Rhine, thirty years ago', in the "Memorials of a Tour on the
Continent' in 1820, and the note appended to it.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





GUILT AND SORROW; OR, INCIDENTS UPON SALISBURY PLAIN


Composed 1791-4.--Published as 'The Female Vagrant' in "Lyrical Ballads"
in 1798, and as 'Guilt and Sorrow' in the "Poems of Early and Late
Years," and in "Poems written in Youth," in 1845, and onward.


  ADVERTISEMENT, PREFIXED TO THE FIRST EDITION OF THIS POEM, PUBLISHED
  IN 1842.

  Not less than one-third of the following poem, though it has from time
  to time been altered in the expression, was published so far back as
  the year 1798, under the title of 'The Female Vagrant'. The extract is
  of such length that an apology seems to be required for reprinting it
  here; but it was necessary to restore it to its original position, or
  the rest would have been unintelligible. The whole was written before
  the close of the year 1794, and I will detail, rather as matter of
  literary biography than for any other reason, the circumstances under
  which it was produced.

  During the latter part of the summer of 1793, having passed a month in
  the Isle of Wight, in view of the fleet which was then preparing for
  sea off Portsmouth at the commencement of the war, I left the place
  with melancholy forebodings. The American war was still fresh in
  memory. The struggle which was beginning, and which many thought would
  be brought to a speedy close by the irresistible arms of Great Britain
  being added to those of the allies, I was assured in my own mind would
  be of long continuance, and productive of distress and misery beyond
  all possible calculation. This conviction was pressed upon me by
  having been a witness, during a long residence in revolutionary
  France, of the spirit which prevailed in that country. After leaving
  the Isle of Wight, I spent two [A] days in wandering on foot over
  Salisbury Plain, which, though cultivation was then widely spread
  through parts of it, had upon the whole a still more impressive
  appearance than it now retains.

  The monuments and traces of antiquity, scattered in abundance over
  that region, led me unavoidably to compare what we know or guess of
  those remote times with certain aspects of modern society, and with
  calamities, principally those consequent upon war, to which, more than
  other classes of men, the poor are subject. In those reflections,
  joined with some particular facts that had come to my knowledge, the
  following stanzas originated.

  In conclusion, to obviate some distraction in the minds of those who
  are well acquainted with Salisbury Plain, it may be proper to say,
  that of the features described as belonging to it, one or two are
  taken from other desolate parts of England.


       *       *       *       *       *

  [Unwilling to be unnecessarily particular, I have assigned this poem
  to the dates 1793 and '94; but, in fact, much of the Female Vagrant's
  story was composed at least two years before. All that relates to her
  sufferings as a sailor's wife in America, and her condition of mind
  during her voyage home, were faithfully taken from the report made to
  me of her own case by a friend who had been subjected to the same
  trials, and affected in the same way. Mr. Coleridge, when I first
  became acquainted with him, was so much impressed with this poem, that
  it would have encouraged me to publish the whole as it then stood; but
  the mariner's fate appeared to me so tragical, as to require a
  treatment more subdued, and yet more strictly applicable in
  expression, than I had at first given to it. This fault was corrected
  nearly sixty years afterwards, when I determined to publish the whole.
  It may be worth while to remark, that, though the incidents of this
  attempt do only in a small degree produce each other, and it deviates
  accordingly from the general rule by which narrative pieces ought to
  be governed, it is not, therefore, wanting in continuous hold upon the
  mind, or in unity, which is effected by the identity of moral interest
  that places the two personages upon the same footing in the reader's
  sympathies. My ramble over many parts of Salisbury Plain put me, as
  mentioned in the preface, upon writing this poem, and left upon my
  mind imaginative impressions, the force of which I have felt to this
  day. From that district I proceeded to Bath, Bristol, and so on to the
  banks of the Wye; where I took again to travelling on foot. In
  remembrance of that part of my journey, which was in '93, I began the
  verses,--'Five years have passed,' etc.--I. F.]


       *       *       *       *       *

The foregoing is the Fenwick note to 'Guilt and Sorrow'. The note to
'The Female Vagrant',--which was the title under which one-third of the
longer poem appeared in all the complete editions prior to 1845--is as
follows.--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *


  [I find the date of this is placed in 1792, in contradiction, by
  mistake, to what I have asserted in 'Guilt and Sorrow'. The correct
  date is 1793-4. The chief incidents of it, more particularly her
  description of her feelings on the Atlantic, are taken from life.--I.
  F.]


       *       *       *       *       *


In 1798 there were thirty stanzas in this poem; in 1802, twenty-six; in
1815, fourteen; in 1820, twenty-five. Stanzas I. to XXII., XXXV. to
XXXVII., and LI. to LXXIV. occur only in the collected edition of 1842,
vol. vii. (also published as "Poems, chiefly of Early and Late Years"),
and in subsequent editions. Wordsworth placed 'The Female Vagrant' among
his "Juvenile Pieces" from 1815 to 1832. In 1836, he included it along
with 'Descriptive Sketches' in his Table of Contents; [B] but as he
numbered it IV. in the text--the other poems belonging to the "Juvenile
Pieces" being numbered I. II. and III.--it is clear that he meant it to
remain in that class. The "Poems written in Youth," of the edition of
1845, include many others in addition to the "Juvenile Pieces" of
editions 1815 to 1836.--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *


I

  A traveller on the skirt of Sarum's Plain
  Pursued his vagrant way, with feet half bare;
  Stooping his gait, but not as if to gain
  Help from the staff he bore; for mien and air
  Were hardy, though his cheek seemed worn with care                 5
  Both of the time to come, and time long fled:
  Down fell in straggling locks his thin grey hair;
  A coat he wore of military red
  But faded, and stuck o'er with many a patch and shred.


II

  While thus he journeyed, step by step led on,                     10
  He saw and passed a stately inn, full sure
  That welcome in such house for him was none.
  No board inscribed the needy to allure
  Hung there, no bush proclaimed to old and poor
  And desolate, "Here you will find a friend!"                      15
  The pendent grapes glittered above the door;--
  On he must pace, perchance 'till night descend,
  Where'er the dreary roads their bare white lines extend.


III

  The gathering clouds grew red with stormy fire,
  In streaks diverging wide and mounting high;                      20
  That inn he long had passed; the distant spire,
  Which oft as he looked back had fixed his eye,
  Was lost, though still he looked, in the blank sky.
  Perplexed and comfortless he gazed around,
  And scarce could any trace of man descry,                         25
  Save cornfields stretched and stretching without bound;
  But where the sower dwelt was nowhere to be found.


IV

  No tree was there, no meadow's pleasant green,
  No brook to wet his lip or soothe his ear;
  Long files of corn-stacks here and there were seen,               30
  But not one dwelling-place his heart to cheer.
  Some labourer, thought he, may perchance be near;
  And so he sent a feeble shout--in vain;
  No voice made answer, he could only hear
  Winds rustling over plots of unripe grain,                        35
  Or whistling thro' thin grass along the unfurrowed plain.


V

  Long had he fancied each successive slope
  Concealed some cottage, whither he might turn
  And rest; but now along heaven's darkening cope
  The crows rushed by in eddies, homeward borne.                    40
  Thus warned he sought some shepherd's spreading thorn
  Or hovel from the storm to shield his head,
  But sought in vain; for now, all wild, forlorn,
  And vacant, a huge waste around him spread;
  The wet cold ground, he feared, must be his only bed.             45


VI

  And be it so--for to the chill night shower
  And the sharp wind his head he oft hath bared;
  A Sailor he, who many a wretched hour
  Hath told; for, landing after labour hard,
  Full long [1] endured in hope of just reward,                     50
  He to an armed fleet was forced away
  By seamen, who perhaps themselves had shared
  Like fate; was hurried off, a helpless prey,
  'Gainst all that in _his_ heart, or theirs perhaps, said nay.


VII

  For years the work of carnage did not cease.                      55
  And death's dire aspect daily he surveyed,
  Death's minister; then came his glad release,
  And hope returned, and pleasure fondly made
  Her dwelling in his dreams. By Fancy's aid
  The happy husband flies, his arms to throw                        60
  Round his wife's neck; the prize of victory laid
  In her full lap, he sees such sweet tears flow
  As if thenceforth nor pain nor trouble she could know.


VIII

  Vain hope! for fraud took all that he had earned.
  The lion roars and gluts his tawny brood                          65
  Even in the desert's heart; but he, returned,
  Bears not to those he loves their needful food.
  His home approaching, but in such a mood
  That from his sight his children might have run,
  He met a traveller, robbed him, shed his blood;                   70
  And when the miserable work was done
  He fled, a vagrant since, the murderer's fate to shun.


IX

  From that day forth no place to him could be
  So lonely, but that thence might come a pang
  Brought from without to inward misery.                            75
  Now, as he plodded on, with sullen clang
  A sound of chains along the desert rang;
  He looked, and saw upon a gibbet high
  A human body that in irons swang,
  Uplifted by the tempest whirling by;                              80
  And, hovering, round it often did a raven fly. [C]


X

  It was a spectacle which none might view,
  In spot so savage, but with shuddering pain;
  Nor only did for him at once renew
  All he had feared from man, but roused a train                    85
  Of the mind's phantoms, horrible as vain.
  The stones, as if to cover him from day,
  Rolled at his back along the living plain;
  He fell, and without sense or motion lay;
  But, when the trance was gone, feebly pursued [2] his way.        90


XI

  As one whose brain habitual [3] frensy fires
  Owes to the fit in which his soul hath tossed
  Profounder quiet, when the fit retires,
  Even so the dire phantasma which had crossed
  His sense, in sudden vacancy quite lost,                          95
  Left his mind still as a deep evening stream.
  Nor, if accosted now, in thought engrossed,
  Moody, or inly troubled, would he seem
  To traveller who might talk of any casual theme.


XII

  Hurtle the clouds in deeper darkness piled,                      100
  Gone is the raven timely rest to seek;
  He seemed the only creature in the wild
  On whom the elements their rage might wreak;
  Save that the bustard, of those regions bleak
  Shy tenant, seeing by the uncertain light                        105
  A man there wandering, gave a mournful shriek,
  And half upon the ground, with strange affright,
  Forced hard against the wind a thick unwieldy flight.


XIII

  All, all was cheerless to the horizon's bound;
  The weary eye--which, wheresoe'er it strays,                     110
  Marks nothing but the red sun's setting round,
  Or on the earth strange lines, in former days
  Left by gigantic arms--at length surveys
  What seems an antique castle spreading wide;
  Hoary and naked are its walls, and raise                         115
  Their brow sublime: in shelter there to bide
  He turned, while rain poured down smoking on every side.


XIV

  Pile of Stone-henge! so proud to hint yet keep
  Thy secrets, thou that lov'st to stand and hear
  The Plain resounding to the whirlwind's sweep,                   120
  Inmate of lonesome Nature's endless year;
  Even if thou saw'st the giant wicker rear
  For sacrifice its throngs of living men,
  Before thy face did ever wretch appear,
  Who in his heart had groaned with deadlier pain                  125
  Than he who, tempest-driven, thy shelter now would gain? [4]

XV

  Within that fabric of mysterious form,
  Winds met in conflict, each by turns supreme;
  And, from the perilous ground dislodged, [5] through storm
  And rain he wildered on, no moon to stream                       130
  From gulf of parting clouds one friendly beam,
  Nor any friendly sound his footsteps led;
  Once did the lightning's faint disastrous gleam
  Disclose a naked guide-post's double head,
  Sight which tho' lost at once a gleam of pleasure shed.          135


XVI

  No swinging sign-board creaked from cottage elm
  To stay his steps with faintness overcome;
  'Twas dark and void as ocean's watery realm
  Roaring with storms beneath night's starless gloom;
  No gipsy cower'd o'er fire of furze or broom;                    140
  No labourer watched his red kiln glaring bright,
  Nor taper glimmered dim from sick man's room;
  Along the waste no line of mournful light
  From lamp of lonely toll-gate streamed athwart the night.


XVII

  At length, though hid in clouds, the moon arose;                 145
  The downs were visible--and now revealed
  A structure stands, which two bare slopes enclose.
  It was a spot, where, ancient vows fulfilled,
  Kind pious hands did to the Virgin build
  A lonely Spital, the belated swain                               150
  From the night terrors of that waste to shield:
  But there no human being could remain,
  And now the walls are named the "Dead House" of the plain.


XVIII

  Though he had little cause to love the abode
  Of man, or covet sight of mortal face,                           155
  Yet when faint beams of light that ruin showed,
  How glad he was at length to find some trace
  Of human shelter in that dreary place.
  Till to his flock the early shepherd goes,
  Here shall much-needed sleep his frame embrace.                  160
  In a dry nook where fern the floor bestrows
  He lays his stiffened limbs,--his eyes begin to close;


XIX

  When hearing a deep sigh, that seemed to come
  From one who mourned in sleep, he raised his head,
  And saw a woman in the naked room                                165
  Outstretched, and turning on a restless bed:
  The moon a wan dead light around her shed.
  He waked her--spake in tone that would not fail,
  He hoped, to calm her mind; but ill he sped,
  For of that ruin she had heard a tale                            170
  Which now with freezing thoughts did all her powers assail;


XX

  Had heard of one who, forced from storms to shroud,
  Felt the loose walls of this decayed Retreat
  Rock to incessant neighings shrill and loud,
  While his horse pawed the floor with furious heat;               175
  Till on a stone, that sparkled to his feet,
  Struck, and still struck again, the troubled horse:
  The man half raised the stone with pain and sweat,
  Half raised, for well his arm might lose its force
  Disclosing the grim head of a late murdered corse.               180


XXI

  Such tale of this lone mansion she had learned,
  And, when that shape, with eyes in sleep half drowned,
  By the moon's sullen lamp she first discerned,
  Cold stony horror all her senses bound.
  Her he addressed in words of cheering sound;                     185
  Recovering heart, like answer did she make;
  And well it was that, of the corse there found,
  In converse that ensued she nothing spake;
  She knew not what dire pangs in him such tale could wake.


XXII

  But soon his voice and words of kind intent                      190
  Banished that dismal thought; and now the wind
  In fainter howlings told its _rage_ was spent:
  Meanwhile discourse ensued of various kind,
  Which by degrees a confidence of mind
  And mutual interest failed not to create.                        195
  And, to a natural sympathy resigned,
  In that forsaken building where they sate
  The Woman thus retraced her own untoward fate.
  [6]


XXIII

  "By Derwent's side my father dwelt--a man
  Of virtuous life, by pious parents bred; [7]                     200
  And I believe that, soon as I began
  To lisp, he made me kneel beside my bed,
  And in his hearing there my prayers I said:
  And afterwards, by my good father taught,
  I read, and loved the books in which I read;                     205
  For books in every neighbouring house I sought,
  And nothing to my mind a sweeter pleasure brought.


XXIV [8]

  "A little croft we owned--a plot of corn,
  A garden stored with peas, and mint, and thyme,
  And flowers for posies, oft on Sunday morn                       210
  Plucked while the church bells rang their earliest chime.
  Can I forget our freaks at shearing time!
  My hen's rich nest through long grass scarce espied;
  The cowslip-gathering in June's dewy prime;
  The swans that with white chests upreared in pride               215
  Rushing and racing came to meet me at the water-side! [9]


XXV

  "The staff I well [10] remember which upbore
  The bending body of my active sire;
  His seat beneath the honied sycamore
  Where [11] the bees hummed, and chair by winter fire;            220
  When market-morning came, the neat attire
  With which, though bent on haste, myself I decked;
  Our watchful house-dog, that would tease and tire
  The stranger till its barking-fit I checked; [12]
  The red-breast, known for years, which at my casement pecked.    225


XXVI

  "The suns of twenty summers danced along,--
  Too little marked how fast they rolled away:
  But, through severe mischance and cruel wrong,
  My father's substance fell into decay:
  We toiled and struggled, hoping for a day                        230
  When Fortune might [13] put on a kinder look;
  But vain were wishes, efforts vain as they;
  He from his old hereditary nook
  Must part; the summons [14] came;--our final leave we took. [15]
  [16]


XXVII

  "It was indeed a miserable hour [17]                             235
  When, from the last hill-top, my sire surveyed,
  Peering above the trees, the steeple tower
  That on his marriage day sweet music made!
  Till then, he hoped his bones might there be laid
  Close by my mother in their native bowers:                       240
  Bidding me trust in God, he stood and prayed;--
  I could not pray:--through tears that fell in showers
  Glimmered our dear-loved home, alas! no longer ours! [18]


XXVIII

  "There was a Youth whom I had loved so long,
  That when I loved him not I cannot say:                          245
  'Mid the green mountains many a thoughtless song [19]
  We two had sung, like gladsome birds [20] in May;
  When we began to tire of childish play,
  We seemed still more and more to prize each other;
  We talked of marriage and our marriage day;                      250
  And I in truth did love him like a brother,
  For never could I hope to meet with such another.


XXIX

  "Two years were passed since to a distant town
  He had repaired to ply a gainful trade: [21]
  What tears of bitter grief, till then unknown!                   255
  What tender vows our last sad kiss delayed!
  To him we turned:--we had no other aid:
  Like one revived, upon his neck I wept;
  And her whom he had loved in joy, he said,
  He well could love in grief; his faith he kept;                  260
  And in a quiet home once more my father slept.


XXX

  "We lived in peace and comfort; and were blest
  With daily bread, by constant toil supplied. [22]
  Three lovely babes had lain upon my breast; [23]
  And often, viewing their sweet smiles, I sighed,                 265
  And knew not why. My happy father died,
  When threatened war [24] reduced the children's meal:
  Thrice happy! that for him the grave could hide [25]
  The empty loom, cold hearth, and silent wheel,
  And tears that [26] flowed for ills which patience might [27]    270
    not heal.


XXXI

  "'Twas a hard change; an evil time was come;
  We had no hope, and no relief could gain:
  But soon, with proud parade, [28] the noisy drum
  Beat round to clear [29] the streets of want and pain.
  My husband's arms now only served to strain                      275
  Me and his children hungering in his view;
  In such dismay my prayers and tears were vain:
  To join those miserable men he flew,
  And now to the sea-coast, with numbers more, we drew.


XXXII

  "There were we long neglected, and we bore                       280
  Much sorrow ere the fleet its anchor weighed [30]
  Green fields before us, and our native shore,
  We breathed a pestilential air, that made
  Ravage for which no knell was heard. We prayed
  For our departure; wished and wished--nor knew,                  285
  'Mid that long sickness and those hopes delayed, [31]
  That happier days we never more must view.
  The parting signal streamed--at last the land withdrew.


XXXIII

  "But the calm summer season now was past. [32]
  On as we drove, the equinoctial deep                             290
  Ran mountains high before the howling blast,
  And many perished in the whirlwind's sweep.
  We gazed with terror on their gloomy sleep, [33]
  Untaught that soon such anguish must ensue,
  Our hopes such harvest of affliction reap,                       295
  That we the mercy of the waves should rue:
  We reached the western world, a poor devoted crew.
  [34]


XXXIV

  "The pains and plagues that on our heads came down,
  Disease and famine, agony and fear,
  In wood or wilderness, in camp or town,                          300
  It would unman the firmest heart to hear. [35]
  All perished--all in one remorseless year,
  Husband and children! one by one, by sword
  And ravenous plague, all perished: every tear
  Dried up, despairing, desolate, on board                         305
  A British ship I waked, as from a trance restored."


XXXV

  Here paused she of all present thought forlorn,
  Nor voice, nor sound, that moment's pain expressed,
  Yet Nature, with excess of grief o'erborne,
  From her full eyes their watery load released.                   310
  He too was mute: and, ere her weeping ceased,
  He rose, and to the ruin's portal went,
  And saw the dawn opening the silvery east
  With rays of promise, north and southward sent;
  And soon with crimson fire kindled the firmament.                315


XXXVI

  "O come," he cried, "come, after weary night
  Of such rough storm, this happy change to view."
  So forth she came, and eastward looked; the sight
  Over her brow like dawn of gladness threw;
  Upon her cheek, to which its youthful hue                        320
  Seemed to return, dried the last lingering tear,
  And from her grateful heart a fresh one drew:
  The whilst her comrade to her pensive cheer
  Tempered fit words of hope; and the lark warbled near.


XXXVII

  They looked and saw a lengthening road, and wain                 325
  That rang down a bare slope not far remote:
  The barrows glistered bright with drops of rain,
  Whistled the waggoner with merry note,
  The cock far off sounded his clarion throat;
  But town, or farm, or hamlet, none they viewed,                  330
  Only were told there stood a lonely cot
  A long mile thence. While thither they pursued
  Their way, the Woman thus her mournful tale renewed.


XXXVIII

  "Peaceful as this immeasurable plain
  Is now, by beams of dawning light imprest, [36]                  335
  In the calm sunshine slept the glittering main;
  The very ocean hath its hour of rest.
  I too forgot the heavings of my breast. [37]
  How quiet 'round me ship and ocean were!
  As quiet all within me. I was blest,                             340
  And looked, and fed upon the silent air
  Until it seemed to bring a joy to my despair.[38]


XXXIX

  "Ah! how unlike those late terrific sleeps,
  And groans that rage of racking famine spoke;
  The unburied dead that lay in festering heaps,[39]               345
  The breathing pestilence that rose like smoke,
  The shriek that from the distant battle broke,
  The mine's dire earthquake, and the pallid host
  Driven by the bomb's incessant thunder-stroke
  To loathsome vaults, where heart-sick anguish tossed,            350
  Hope died, and fear itself in agony was lost!
  [40]


XL

  "Some mighty gulf of separation passed,
  I seemed transported to another world;
  A thought resigned with pain, when from the mast
  The impatient mariner the sail unfurled,                         355
  And, whistling, called the wind that hardly curled
  The silent sea. From the sweet thoughts of home
  And from all hope I was for ever hurled.
  For me--farthest from earthly port to roam
  Was best, could I but shun the spot where man might come.        360


XLI

  "And oft I thought (my fancy was so strong)
  That I, at last, a resting-place had found;
  'Here will I dwell,' said I, 'my whole life long, [41]
  Roaming the illimitable waters round;
  Here will I live, of all but heaven disowned,                    365
  And end my days upon the peaceful flood.'--[42]
  To break my dream the vessel reached its bound;
  And homeless near a thousand homes I stood,
  And near a thousand tables pined and wanted food.


XLII

  "No help I sought; in sorrow turned adrift,                     370
  Was hopeless, as if cast on some bare rock; [43]
  Nor morsel to my mouth that day did lift,
  Nor raised [44] my hand at any door to knock.
  I lay where, with his drowsy mates, the cock
  From the cross-timber of an out-house hung:                     375
  Dismally [45] tolled, that night, the city clock!
  At morn my sick heart hunger scarcely stung,
  Nor to the beggar's language could I fit [46] my tongue.


XLIII

  "So passed a second day; and, when the third
  Was come, I tried in vain the crowd's resort. [47]              380
 --In deep despair, by frightful wishes stirred,
  Near the sea-side I reached a ruined fort;
  There, pains which nature could no more support,
  With blindness linked, did on my vitals fall;
  And, after many interruptions short [48]                        385
  Of hideous sense, I sank, [49] nor step could crawl:
  Unsought for was the help that did my life recal. [50]


XLIV

  "Borne to a hospital, I lay with brain
  Drowsy and weak, and shattered memory; [51]
  I heard my neighbours in their beds complain                    390
  Of many things which never troubled me--
  Of feet still bustling round with busy glee,
  Of looks where common kindness had no part,
  Of service done with cold formality, [52]
  Fretting the fever round the languid heart,                     395
  And groans which, as they said, might [53] make a dead man
    start.


XLV

  "These things just served to stir the slumbering [54] sense,
  Nor pain nor pity in my bosom raised.
  With strength did memory return; [55] and, thence
  Dismissed, again on open day I gazed,                           400
  At houses, men, and common light, amazed.
  The lanes I sought, and, as the sun retired,
  Came where beneath the trees a faggot blazed;
  The travellers [56] saw me weep, my fate inquired,
  And gave me food--and rest, more welcome, more desired.         405
  [57]


XLVI

  "Rough potters seemed they, trading soberly
  With panniered asses driven from door to door;
  But life of happier sort set forth to me, [58]
  And other joys my fancy to allure--
  The bag-pipe dinning on the midnight moor                       410
  In barn uplighted; and companions boon,
  Well met from far with revelry secure
  Among the forest glades, while jocund June [59]
  Rolled fast along the sky his warm and genial moon.


XLVII

  "But ill they suited me--those journeys dark [60]               415
  O'er moor and mountain, midnight theft to hatch!
  To charm the surly house-dog's faithful bark,
  Or hang on tip-toe at the lifted latch.
  The gloomy lantern, and the dim blue match.
  The black disguise, the warning whistle shrill,                 420
  And ear still busy on its nightly watch,
  Were not for me, brought up in nothing ill:
  Besides, on griefs so fresh my thoughts were brooding still.


XLVIII

  "What could I do, unaided and unblest?
  My [61] father! gone was every friend of thine:                 425
  And kindred of dead husband are at best
  Small help; and, after marriage such as mine,
  With little kindness would to me incline.
  Nor was I [62] then for toil or service fit;
  My deep-drawn sighs no effort could confine;                    430
  In open air forgetful would I sit [63]
  Whole hours, with [64] idle arms in moping sorrow knit.


XLIX

  "The roads I paced, I loitered through the fields;
  Contentedly, yet sometimes self-accused,
  Trusted my life to what chance bounty yields, [65]              435
  Now coldly given, now utterly refused.
  The ground [66] I for my bed have often used:
  But what afflicts my peace with keenest ruth,
  Is that I have my inner self abused,
  Forgone the home delight of constant truth,                     440
  And clear and open soul, so prized in fearless youth.


L

  "Through tears the rising sun I oft have viewed,
  Through tears have seen him towards that world descend [67]
  Where my poor heart lost all its fortitude:
  Three years a wanderer now my course I bend--[68]               445
  Oh! tell me whither--for no earthly friend
  Have I."--She ceased, and weeping turned away;
  As if because her tale was at an end,
  She wept; because she had no more to say
  Of that perpetual weight which on her spirit lay.               450


LI

  True sympathy the Sailor's looks expressed,
  His looks--for pondering he was mute the while.
  Of social Order's care for wretchedness,
  Of Time's sure help to calm and reconcile,
  Joy's second spring and Hope's long-treasured smile,            455
  'Twas not for _him_ to speak--a man so tried.
  Yet, to relieve her heart, in friendly style
  Proverbial words of comfort he applied,
  And not in vain, while they went pacing side by side.


LII

  Ere long, from heaps of turf, before their sight,               460
  Together smoking in the sun's slant beam,
  Rise various wreaths that into one unite
  Which high and higher mounts with silver gleam:
  Fair spectacle,--but instantly a scream
  Thence bursting shrill did all remark prevent;                  465
  They paused, and heard a hoarser voice blaspheme,
  And female cries. Their course they thither bent,
  And met a man who foamed with anger vehement.


LIII

  A woman stood with quivering lips and pale,
  And, pointing to a little child that lay                        470
  Stretched on the ground, began a piteous tale;
  How in a simple freak of thoughtless play
  He had provoked his father, who straightway,
  As if each blow were deadlier than the last,
  Struck the poor innocent. Pallid with dismay                    475
  The Soldier's Widow heard and stood aghast;
  And stern looks on the man her grey-haired Comrade cast.


LIV

  His voice with indignation rising high
  Such further deed in manhood's name forbade;
  The peasant, wild in passion, made reply                        480
  With bitter insult and revilings sad;
  Asked him in scorn what business there he had;
  What kind of plunder he was hunting now;
  The gallows would one day of him be glad;--
  Though inward anguish damped the Sailor's brow,                 485
  Yet calm he seemed as thoughts so poignant would allow.


LV

  Softly he stroked the child, who lay outstretched
  With face to earth; and, as the boy turned round
  His battered head, a groan the Sailor fetched
  As if he saw--there and upon that ground--                     490
  Strange repetition of the deadly wound
  He had himself inflicted. Through his brain
  At once the griding iron passage found; [D]
  Deluge of tender thoughts then rushed amain,
  Nor could his sunken eyes the starting tear restrain.           495


LVI

  Within himself he said--What hearts have we!
  The blessing this a father gives his child!
  Yet happy thou, poor boy! compared with me,
  Suffering not doing ill--fate far more mild.
  The stranger's looks and tears of wrath beguiled                500
  The father, and relenting thoughts awoke;
  He kissed his son--so all was reconciled.
  Then, with a voice which inward trouble broke
  Ere to his lips it came, the Sailor them bespoke.


LVII

  "Bad is the world, and hard is the world's law                 505
  Even for the man who wears the warmest fleece;
  Much need have ye that time more closely draw
  The bond of nature, all unkindness cease,
  And that among so few there still be peace:
  Else can ye hope but with such numerous foes                   510
  Your pains shall ever with your years increase?"--
  While from his heart the appropriate lesson flows,
  A correspondent calm stole gently o'er his woes.


LVIII


  Forthwith the pair passed on; and down they look
  Into a narrow valley's pleasant scene                          515
  Where wreaths of vapour tracked a winding brook,
  That babbled on through groves and meadows green;
  A low-roofed house peeped out the trees between;
  The dripping groves resound with cheerful lays,
  And melancholy lowings intervene                               520
  Of scattered herds, that in the meadow graze,
  Some amid lingering shade, some touched by the sun's rays.


LIX

  They saw and heard, and, winding with the road
  Down a thick wood, they dropt into the vale;
  Comfort by prouder mansions unbestowed                         525
  Their wearied frames, she hoped, would soon regale.
  Erelong they reached that cottage in the dale:
  It was a rustic inn;--the board was spread,
  The milk-maid followed with her brimming pail,
  And lustily the master carved the bread,                       530
  Kindly the housewife pressed, and they in comfort fed.


LX


  Their breakfast done, the pair, though loth, must part;
  Wanderers whose course no longer now agrees.
  She rose and bade farewell! and, while her heart
  Struggled with tears nor could its sorrow ease,                535
  She left him there; for, clustering round his knees,
  With his oak-staff the cottage children played;
  And soon she reached a spot o'erhung with trees
  And banks of ragged earth; beneath the shade
  Across the pebbly road a little runnel strayed.                540


LXI

  A cart and horse beside the rivulet stood;
  Chequering the canvas roof the sunbeams shone.
  She saw the carman bend to scoop the flood
  As the wain fronted her,--wherein lay one,
  A pale-faced Woman, in disease far gone.                       545
  The carman wet her lips as well behoved;
  Bed under her lean body there was none,
  Though even to die near one she most had loved
  She could not of herself those wasted limbs have moved.


LXII

  The Soldier's Widow learned with honest pain                   550
  And homefelt force of sympathy sincere,
  Why thus that worn-out wretch must there sustain
  The jolting road and morning air severe.
  The wain pursued its way; and following near
  In pure compassion she her steps retraced                      555
  Far as the cottage. "A sad sight is here,"
  She cried aloud; and forth ran out in haste
  The friends whom she had left but a few minutes past.


LXIII

  While to the door with eager speed they ran,
  From her bare straw the Woman half upraised                    560
  Her bony visage--gaunt and deadly wan;
  No pity asking, on the group she gazed
  With a dim eye, distracted and amazed;
  Then sank upon her straw with feeble moan.
  Fervently cried the housewife--"God be praised,                565
  I have a house that I can call my own;
  Nor shall she perish there, untended and alone!"


LXIV

  So in they bear her to the chimney seat,
  And busily, though yet with fear, untie
  Her garments, and, to warm her icy feet                        570
  And chafe her temples, careful hands apply.
  Nature reviving, with a deep-drawn sigh
  She strove, and not in vain, her head to rear;
  Then said--"I thank you all; if I must die,
  The God in heaven my prayers for you will hear;                575
  Till now I did not think my end had been so near.


LXV

  "Barred every comfort labour could procure,
  Suffering what no endurance could assuage,
  I was compelled to seek my father's door,
  Though loth to be a burthen on his age.                        580
  But sickness stopped me in an early stage
  Of my sad journey; and within the wain
  They placed me--there to end life's pilgrimage,
  Unless beneath your roof I may remain:
  For I shall never see my father's door again.                  585


LXVI

  "My life, Heaven knows, hath long been burthensome;
  But, if I have not meekly suffered, meek
  May my end be! Soon will this voice be dumb:
  Should child of mine e'er wander hither, speak
  Of me, say that the worm is on my cheek.--                    590
  Torn from our hut, that stood beside the sea
  Near Portland lighthouse in a lonesome creek,
  My husband served in sad captivity
  On shipboard, bound till peace or death should set him free.


LXVII

  "A sailor's wife I knew a widow's cares,                       595
  Yet two sweet little ones partook my bed;
  Hope cheered my dreams, and to my daily prayers
  Our heavenly Father granted each day's bread;
  Till one was found by stroke of violence dead,
  Whose body near our cottage chanced to lie;                    600
  A dire suspicion drove us from our shed;
  In vain to find a friendly face we try,
  Nor could we live together those poor boys and I;


LXVIII

  "For evil tongues made oath how on that day
  My husband lurked about the neighbourhood;                     605
  Now he had fled, and whither none could say,
  And _he_ had done the deed in the dark wood--
  Near his own home!--but he was mild and good;
  Never on earth was gentler creature seen;
  He'd not have robbed the raven of its food.                    610
  My husband's loving kindness stood between
  Me and all worldly harms and wrongs however keen."


LXIX

  Alas! the thing she told with labouring breath
  The Sailor knew too well. That wickedness
  His hand had wrought; and when, in the hour of death,          615
  He saw his Wife's lips move his name to bless
  With her last words, unable to suppress
  His anguish, with his heart he ceased to strive;
  And, weeping loud in this extreme distress,
  He cried--"Do pity me! That thou shouldst live                 620
  I neither ask nor wish--forgive me, but forgive!"


LXX

  To tell the change that Voice within her wrought
  Nature by sign or sound made no essay;
  A sudden joy surprised expiring thought,
  And every mortal pang dissolved away.                          625
  Borne gently to a bed, in death she lay;
  Yet still while over her the husband bent,
  A look was in her face which seemed to say,
  "Be blest: by sight of thee from heaven was sent
  Peace to my parting soul, the fulness of content."             630


LXXI

  _She_ slept in peace,--his pulses throbbed and stopped,
  Breathless he gazed upon her face,--then took
  Her hand in his, and raised it, but both dropped,
  When on his own he cast a rueful look.
  His ears were never silent; sleep forsook                      635
  His burning eyelids stretched and stiff as lead;
  All night from time to time under him shook
  The floor as he lay shuddering on his bed;
  And oft he groaned aloud, "O God, that I were dead!"


LXXII

  The Soldier's Widow lingered in the cot;                       640
  And, when he rose, he thanked her pious care
  Through which his Wife, to that kind shelter brought,
  Died in his arms; and with those thanks a prayer
  He breathed for her, and for that merciful pair.
  The corse interred, not one hour he remained                   645
  Beneath their roof, but to the open air
  A burthen, now with fortitude sustained,
  He bore within a breast where dreadful quiet reigned.


LXXIII

  Confirmed of purpose, fearlessly prepared
  For act and suffering, to the city straight                    650
  He journeyed, and forthwith his crime declared:
  "And from your doom," he added, "now I wait,
  Nor let it linger long, the murderer's fate."
  Not ineffectual was that piteous claim:
  "O welcome sentence which will end though late,"               655
  He said, "the pangs that to my conscience came
  Out of that deed. My trust, Saviour! is in thy name!"


LXXIV

  His fate was pitied. Him in iron case
  (Reader, forgive the intolerable thought)
  They hung not:--no one on _his_ form or face                   660
  Could gaze, as on a show by idlers sought;
  No kindred sufferer, to his death-place brought
  By lawless curiosity or chance,
  When into storm the evening sky is wrought,
  Upon his swinging corse an eye can glance,                     665
  And drop, as he once dropped, in miserable trance.


         *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1845.

    Three years ...    1842.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

    ... rose and pursued ...    1842.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

    ... demoniac ...    1842.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

    Than he who now at night-fall treads thy bare domain!    1842.]


[Variant 5:

1845.

    And, from its perilous shelter driven, ...    1842.]


[Variant 6: The following stanza was only in the editions of 1798 and
1800:

    By Derwent's side my Father's cottage stood,
    (The Woman thus her artless story told)
    One field, a flock, and what the neighbouring flood
    Supplied, to him were more than mines of gold.
    Light was my sleep; my days in transport roll'd:
    With thoughtless joy I stretch'd along the shore
    My father's nets, or watched, when from the fold
    High o'er the cliffs I led my fleecy store,
    A dizzy depth below! his boat and twinkling oar.           1798.

    ... or from the mountain fold
    Saw on the distant lake his twinkling oar
    Or watch'd his lazy boat still less'ning more and more.    1800.]


[Variant 7:

1842.

    My father was a good and pious man,
    An honest man by honest parents bred,    1798.]


[Variant 8: Stanzas XXIV. and XXV. were omitted from the editions of
1802 and 1805. They were restored in 1820.]


[Variant 9:

1842.

    Can I forget what charms did once adorn
    My garden, stored with pease, and mint, and thyme,
    And rose and lilly for the sabbath morn?
    The sabbath bells, and their delightful chime;
    The gambols and wild freaks at shearing time;
    My hen's rich nest through long grass scarce espied;
    The cowslip-gathering at May's dewy prime;
    The swans, that, when I sought the water-side,
    From far to meet me came, spreading their snowy pride.    1798.

    Can I forget our croft and plot of corn;
    Our garden, stored ...                                    1836.

    The cowslip-gathering in June's dewy prime;    1820.

    The swans, that with white chests upheaved in pride,
    Rushing and racing came to meet me at the waterside.      1836.]


[Variant 10:

1842.

    ... yet ...    1798.]


[Variant 11:

1802.

    When ...    1798.]


[Variant 12:

1836.

    My watchful dog, whose starts of furious ire,
    When stranger passed, so often I have check'd;    1798.]


[Variant 13:

1845.

    ... would ...    1842.]


[Variant 14:

1845.

    ... summer ...    1842.]


[Variant 15:

1845.

    The suns of twenty summers danced along,--
    Ah! little marked, how fast they rolled away:
    Then rose a mansion proud our woods among,
    And cottage after cottage owned its sway,
    No joy to see a neighbouring house, or stray
    Through pastures not his own, the master took;
    My Father dared his greedy wish gainsay;
    He loved his old hereditary nook,
    And ill could I the thought of such sad parting brook.     1798.

    Then rose a stately hall our woods among,                  1800.

    ... how fast they rolled away:
    But, through severe mischance, and cruel wrong,
    My father's substance fell into decay;
    We toiled, and struggled--hoping for a day
    When Fortune should put on a kinder look;
    But vain were wishes--efforts vain as they:
    He from his old hereditary nook
    Must part,--the summons came,--our final leave we took.    1820.]


[Variant 16: The following stanza occurs only in the editions 1798 to
1805:

    But, when he had refused the proffered gold,
    To cruel injuries he became a prey,
    Sore traversed in whate'er he bought and sold:
    His troubles grew upon him day by day,
    Till all his substance fell into decay.
    His little range of water was denied; [i]
    All but the bed where his old body lay,
    All, all was seized, and weeping, side by side,
    We sought a home where we uninjured might abide.    1798.

    And all his substance fell into decay.
    They dealt most hardly with him, and he tried
    To move their hearts--but it was vain--for they
    Seized all he had; and, weeping ...               1802-5.]



[Variant 17:

1820.

    Can I forget that miserable hour,    1798.

    It was in truth a lamentable hour    1802.]


[Variant 18:

1798.

    I saw our own dear home, that was ...    1802.

The edition of 1820 returns to the text of 1798.]


[Variant 19:

1827.

    ... many and many a song    1798.]


[Variant 20:

1800.

    ... little birds ...    1798.]


[Variant 21:

1836.

    His father said, that to a distant town
    He must repair, to ply the artist's trade.    1798.

    Two years were pass'd, since to a distant Town
    He had repair'd to ply the artist's trade.    1802.]


[Variant 22:

1802.

    Four years each day with daily bread was blest,
    By constant toil and constant prayer supplied.    1798.]


[Variant 23:

1836.

    Three lovely infants lay upon my breast;    1798.]


[Variant 24:

1842.

    When sad distress...    1798.]


[Variant 25:

1836.

    ... from him the grave did hide    1798.

    ... for him ...    1820.]


[Variant 26:

1798.

    ... which ...    Only in 1820.]


[Variant 27:

1836.

    ... could ...    1798.]


[Variant 28:

1798.

    But soon, day after day, ...    1802.

The edition of 1820 reverts to the reading of 1798.]


[Variant 29:

1836.

    ... to sweep ...    1798.]


[Variant 30:

1836.

    There foul neglect for months and months we bore,
    Nor yet the crowded fleet its anchor stirred.    1798.

    There, long were we neglected, and we bore
    Much sorrow ere the fleet its anchor weigh'd;    1802.]


[Variant 31:

1802.

    Green fields before us and our native shore,
    By fever, from polluted air incurred,
    Ravage was made, for which no knell was heard.
    Fondly we wished, and wished away, nor knew,
    'Mid that long sickness, and those hopes deferr'd,    1798.]


[Variant 32:

1802.

    But from delay the summer calms were past.    1798.]


[Variant 33:

1802.

    We gazed with terror on the gloomy sleep
    Of them that perished in the whirlwind's sweep,    1798.]


[Variant 34:

    Oh! dreadful price of being to resign
    All that is dear _in_ being! better far
    In Want's most lonely cave till death to pine,
    Unseen, unheard, unwatched by any star;
    Or in the streets and walks where proud men are,
    Better our dying bodies to obtrude,
    Than dog-like, wading at the heels of war,
    Protract a curst existence, with the brood
    That lap (their very nourishment!) their brother's blood.

Only in the editions of 1798 and 1800.]


[Variant 35:

1842.

    It would thy brain unsettle even to hear.    1798.]


[Variant 36:

1842.

    Peaceful as some immeasurable plain
   By the first beams of dawning light impress'd,   1798.]


[Variant 37:

1827.

    ... has its hour of rest,
    That comes not to the human mourner's breast.    1798.

    I too was calm, though heavily distress'd!       1802.]


[Variant 38:

1842.

    Remote from man, and storms of mortal care,
    A heavenly silence did the waves invest;
    I looked and looked along the silent air,
    Until it seemed to bring a joy to my despair.    1798.

    Oh me, how quiet sky and ocean were!
    My heart was healed within me, I was bless'd.
    And looked, and looked ...    1802.

    My heart was hushed within me, ...               1815.

    As quiet all within me, ...                      1827.]


[Variant 39:

1800.

    Where looks inhuman dwelt on festering heaps!    1798.]


[Variant 40: The following stanza appeared only in the editions
1798-1805:

    Yet does that burst of woe congeal my frame,
    When the dark streets appeared to heave and gape,
    While like a sea the storming army came,
    And Fire from Hell reared his gigantic shape,
    And Murder, by the ghastly gleam, and Rape
    Seized their joint prey, the mother and the child!
    But from these crazing thoughts my brain, escape!
   --For weeks the balmy air breathed soft and mild,
    And on the gliding vessel Heaven and Ocean smiled.      1798.

    At midnight once the storming Army came,
    Yet do I see the miserable sight,
    The Bayonet, the Soldier, and the Flame
    That followed us and faced us in our flight:
    When Rape and Murder by the ghastly light
    Seized their joint prey, the Mother and the Child!
    But I must leave these thoughts.--From night to night,
    From day to day, the air breathed soft and mild;
    And on the gliding vessel Heaven and Ocean smiled.    1802-5.]


[Variant 41:

1802.

    And oft, robb'd of my perfect mind, I thought
    At last my feet a resting-place had found:
    Here will I weep in peace, (so fancy wrought,)    1798.]


[Variant 42:

1842.

    Here watch, of every human friend disowned,
    All day, my ready tomb the ocean-flood--    1798.

    Here will I live:--of every friend disown'd,
    Here will I roam about the ocean flood.--   1802.

    And end my days upon the ocean flood."--    1815.]


[Variant 43:

1842.

    By grief enfeebled was I turned adrift,
    Helpless as sailor cast on desart rock;       1798.

    Helpless as sailor cast on some bare rock;    1836.]


[Variant 44:

1842.

    Nor dared ...    1798.]


[Variant 45:

1802.

    How dismal ...    1798.]


[Variant 46:

1832.

    ... frame ...    1798.]

[Variant 47:

1836.

    So passed another day, and so the third:
    Then did I try, in vain, the crowd's resort,    1798.]


[Variant 48:

1827.

    Dizzy my brain, with interruption short    1798.

    And I had many interruptions short         1802.]


[Variant 49:

1802.

    ... sunk ...    1798.]


[Variant 50:

1827.

    And thence was borne away to neighbouring hospital.    1798.

    And thence was carried to a neighbouring Hospital.     1802.]


[Variant 51:

1827.

    Recovery came with food: but still, my brain
    Was weak, nor of the past had memory.          1798.]


[Variant 52:

1842.

    ... with careless cruelty,    1798.]


[Variant 53:

1815.

    ... would ...    1798.]


[Variant 54:

1836.

    ... torpid ...    1798.]


[Variant 55:

1827.

    Memory, though slow, returned with strength; ...    1798.

    My memory and my strength returned; ...    1802.]


[Variant 56:

1802.

    The wild brood ...    1798.]


[Variant 57: The following stanza occurs only in the editions of 1798 to
1805:

    My heart is touched to think that men like these,
    The rude earth's tenants, were my first relief:
    How kindly did they paint their vagrant ease!
    And their long holiday that feared not grief,
    For all belonged to all, and each was chief.
    No plough their sinews strained; on grating road
    No wain they drove, and yet, the yellow sheaf
    In every vale for their delight was stowed:
    For them, in nature's meads, the milky udder flowed.    1798.

    My heart is touched to think that men like these,
    Wild houseless Wanderers, were my first relief:         1802.

    In every field, with milk their dairy overflow'd.       1802.]


[Variant 58:

1836.

    Semblance, with straw and pannier'd ass, they made
    Of potters wandering on from door to door:
    But life of happier sort to me pourtrayed,       1798.

    They with their pannier'd Asses semblance made
    Of Potters ...                                   1802.]


[Variant 59:

1836.

    In depth of forest glade, when ...    1798.

    Among the forest glades when ...    1802.]


[Variant 60:

1802.

    But ill it suited me, in journey dark    1798.]


[Variant 61:

1802.

    Poor father! ...    1798.]


[Variant 62:

1842.

    Ill was I ...    1798.]


[Variant 63:

1842.

    With tears whose course no effort could confine,
    By high-way side forgetful would I sit             1798.

    By the road-side forgetful would I sit             1802.

    In the open air forgetful ...                      1836.]


[Variant 64:

1836.

    ... my ...    1798.]



[Variant 65:

1836.

    I lived upon the mercy of the fields,
    And oft of cruelty the sky accused;
    On hazard, or what general bounty yields,    1798.

    I led a wandering life among the fields;
    Contentedly, yet sometimes self-accused,
    I liv'd upon what casual bounty yields,      1802.]


[Variant 66:

1802.

    The fields ...    1798.]


[Variant 67:

1836.

    Three years a wanderer, often have I view'd,
    In tears, the sun towards that country tend    1798.

    Three years thus wandering, ...                1802.]


[Variant 68:

1836.

    And now across this moor my steps I bend--   1798.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES


[Footnote A: In the 'Prelude', he says it was "three summer days." See
book xiii. l. 337.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: By an evident error, corrected in the first reprint of this
edition (1840). See p. 37.--Ed.[Footnote D of 'Descriptive Sketches',
the preceding poem in this text.]]


[Footnote C: From a short MS. poem read to me when an under-graduate, by
my schoolfellow and friend Charles Farish, long since deceased. The
verses were by a brother of his, a man of promising genius, who died
young.--W. W. 1842.

Charles Farish was the author of 'The Minstrels of Winandermere'.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Compare Milton's "grinding sword," 'Paradise Lost', vi. l.
329.--Ed.]



       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTE


[Sub-Footnote i: Several of the Lakes in the north of England are let
out to different Fishermen, in parcels marked out by imaginary lines
drawn from rock to rock.--W. W. 1798.]





       *       *       *       *       *





LINES LEFT UPON A SEAT IN A YEW-TREE, WHICH STANDS NEAR THE LAKE OF
ESTHWAITE, ON A DESOLATE PART OF THE SHORE, COMMANDING [A] A BEAUTIFUL
PROSPECT


Composed 1795.--Published 1798


  [Composed in part at school at Hawkshead. The tree has disappeared,
  and the slip of Common on which it stood, that ran parallel to the
  lake, and lay open to it, has long been enclosed; so that the road has
  lost much of its attraction. This spot was my favourite walk in the
  evenings during the latter part of my school-time. The individual
  whose habits and character are here given, was a gentleman of the
  neighbourhood, a man of talent and learning, who had been educated at
  one of our Universities, and returned to pass his time in seclusion on
  his own estate. He died a bachelor in middle age. Induced by the
  beauty of the prospect, he built a small summer-house, on the rocks
  above the peninsula on which the Ferry House [B] stands. This property
  afterwards passed into the hands of the late Mr. Curwen. The site was
  long ago pointed out by Mr. West, in his 'Guide', as the pride of the
  Lakes, and now goes by the name of "The Station." So much used I to be
  delighted with the view from it, while a little boy, that some years
  before the first pleasure house was built, I led thither from
  Hawkshead a youngster about my own age, an Irish boy, who was a
  servant to an itinerant conjurer. My notion was to witness the
  pleasure I expected the boy would receive from the prospect of the
  islands below and the intermingling water. I was not disappointed; and
  I hope the fact, insignificant as it may appear to some, may be
  thought worthy of note by others who may cast their eye over these
  notes.--I. F.]


       *       *       *       *       *


From 1815 to 1843 these 'Lines' were placed by Wordsworth among his
"Poems of Sentiment and Reflection." In 1845, they were classed among
"Poems written in Youth."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  Nay, Traveller! rest. This lonely Yew-tree stands
  Far from all human dwelling: what if here
  No sparkling rivulet spread the verdant herb?
  What if the bee love not these barren boughs? [1]
  Yet, if the wind breathe soft, the curling waves,                 5
  That break against the shore, shall lull thy mind
  By one soft impulse saved from vacancy.
                              Who he was
  That piled these stones and with the mossy sod
  First covered, and here taught this aged Tree [2]                10
  With its dark arms to form a circling bower, [3]
  I well remember.--He was one who owned
  No common soul. In youth by science nursed,
  And led by nature into a wild scene
  Of lofty hopes, he to the world went forth                       15
  A favoured Being, knowing no desire
  Which genius did not hallow; 'gainst the taint
  Of dissolute tongues, and jealousy, and hate,
  And scorn,--against all enemies prepared,
  All but neglect. The world, for so it thought,                   20
  Owed him no service; wherefore he at once
  With indignation turned himself away, [4]
  And with the food of pride sustained his soul
  In solitude.--Stranger! these gloomy boughs
  Had charms for him; and here he loved to sit,                    25
  His only visitants a straggling sheep,
  The stone-chat, or the glancing sand-piper: [5]
  And on these barren rocks, with fern and heath,
  And juniper and thistle, sprinkled o'er, [6]
  Fixing his downcast [7] eye, he many an hour                     30
  A morbid pleasure nourished, tracing here
  An emblem of his own unfruitful life:
  And, lifting up his head, he then would gaze
  On the more distant scene,--how lovely 'tis
  Thou seest,--and he would gaze till it became                    35
  Far lovelier, and his heart could not sustain
  The beauty, still more beauteous! Nor, that time,
  When nature had subdued him to herself, [8]
  Would he forget those Beings to whose minds
  Warm from the labours of benevolence                             40
  The world, and human life, [9] appeared a scene
  Of kindred loveliness: then he would sigh,
  Inly disturbed, to think [10] that others felt
  What he must never feel: and so, lost Man!
  On visionary views would fancy feed,                             45
  Till his eye streamed with tears. In this deep vale
  He died,--this seat his only monument.
    If Thou be one whose heart the holy forms
  Of young imagination have kept pure,
  Stranger! henceforth be warned; and know that pride,             50
  Howe'er disguised in its own majesty,
  Is littleness; that he who feels contempt
  For any living thing, hath faculties
  Which he has never used; that thought with him
  Is in its infancy. The man whose eye                             55
  Is ever on himself doth look on one,
  The least of Nature's works, one who might move
  The wise man to that scorn which wisdom holds
  Unlawful, ever. O be wiser, Thou!
  Instructed that true knowledge leads to love;                    60
  True dignity abides with him alone
  Who, in the silent hour of inward thought,
  Can still suspect, and still revere himself,
  In lowliness of heart.


       *       *       *       *       *



The place where this Yew-tree stood may be found without difficulty. It
was about three-quarters of a mile from Hawkshead, on the eastern shore
of the lake, a little to the left above the present highway, as one goes
towards Sawrey. Mr. Bowman, the son of Wordsworth's last teacher at the
grammar-school of Hawkshead, told me that it stood about forty yards
nearer the village than the yew which is now on the roadside, and is
sometimes called "Wordsworth's Yew." In the poet's school-days the road
passed right through the unenclosed common, and the tree was a
conspicuous object. It was removed, he says, owing to the popular belief
that its leaves were poisonous, and might injure the cattle grazing in
the common. The present tree is erroneously called "Wordsworth's Yew."
Its proximity to the place where the tree of the poem stood has given
rise to the local tradition.--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1832.

    What if these barren boughs the bee not loves;    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

    First covered o'er, and taught this aged tree,    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1800.

    Now wild, to bend its arms in circling shade,     1798.]


[Variant 4:

1802.

    ... In youth, by genius nurs'd,
    And big with lofty views, he to the world
    Went forth, pure in his heart, against the taint
    Of dissolute tongues, 'gainst jealousy, and hate,
    And scorn, against all enemies prepared,
    All but neglect: and so, his spirit damped
    At once, with rash disdain he turned away,        1798.

    ... The world, for so it thought,
    Owed him no service: he was like a plant
    Fair to the sun, the darling of the winds,
    But hung with fruit which no one, that passed by,
    Regarded, and, his spirit damped at once,
    With indignation did he turn away    1800.]


[Variant 5:

1798.

    The stone-chat, or the sand-lark, restless Bird
    Piping along the margin of the lake;              1815.

    The text of 1820 returned to that of 1798. [i]]


[Variant 6:

1820.

    And on these barren rocks, with juniper,
    And heath, and thistle, thinly sprinkled o'er.    1798.]


[Variant 7:

1800.

    ... downward [ii] ...       1798.]


[Variant 8: This line was added by S. T. C. in the edition of 1800.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

    ... and man himself, ...    1798.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

    With mournful joy, to think ...    1798.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES TO THE TEXT


[Footnote A: Yet commanding,    1798-1805.]


[Footnote B: The Ferry on Windermere.--Ed.]



       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTES TO THE VARIANTS


[Sub-Footnote i: The final retention of the reading of 1798 was probably
due to a remark of Charles Lamb's, in 1815, in which he objected to the
loss of the "admirable line" in the first edition, "a line quite alive,"
he called it. Future generations may doubt whether the reading of 1798,
or that of 1815, is the better.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote ii: An emendation by S. T. C.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE BORDERERS


A TRAGEDY


Composed 1795-6.--Published 1842


  Readers already acquainted with my Poems will recognise, in the
  following composition, some eight or ten lines, [A] which I have not
  scrupled to retain in the places where they originally stood. It is
  proper however to add, that they would not have been used elsewhere,
  if I had foreseen the time when I might be induced to publish this
  Tragedy.

  February 28, 1842. [B]


  This Dramatic Piece, as noted in its title-page, was composed in
  1795-6. It lay nearly from that time till within the last two or three
  months unregarded among my papers, without being mentioned even to my
  most intimate friends. Having, however, impressions upon my mind which
  made me unwilling to destroy the MS., I determined to undertake the
  responsibility of publishing it during my own life, rather than impose
  upon my successors the task of deciding its fate. Accordingly it has
  been revised with some care; but, as it was at first written, and is
  now published, without any view to its exhibition upon the stage, not
  the slightest alteration has been made in the conduct of the story, or
  the composition of the characters; above all, in respect to the two
  leading Persons of the Drama, I felt no inducement to make any change.
  The study of human nature suggests this awful truth, that, as in the
  trials to which life subjects us, sin and crime are apt to start from
  their very opposite qualities, so there are no limits to the hardening
  of the heart, and the perversion of the understanding to which they
  may carry their slaves. During my long residence in France, while the
  Revolution was rapidly advancing to its extreme of wickedness, I had
  frequent opportunities of being an eye-witness of this process, and it
  was while that knowledge was fresh upon my memory, that the Tragedy of
  'The Borderers' was composed. [C]


       *       *       *       *       *


  [Of this dramatic work I have little to say in addition to the short
  printed note which will be found attached to it. It was composed at
  Racedown, in Dorset, during the latter part of the year 1795, and in
  the following year. Had it been the work of a later period of life, it
  would have been different in some respects from what it is now. The
  plot would have been something more complex, and a greater variety of
  characters introduced to relieve the mind from the pressure of
  incidents so mournful. The manners also would have been more attended
  to. My care was almost exclusively given to the passions and the
  characters, and the position in which the persons in the drama stood
  relatively to each other, that the reader (for I had then no thought
  of the stage) might be moved, and to a degree instructed, by lights
  penetrating somewhat into the depths of our nature. In this endeavour,
  I cannot think, upon a very late review, that I have failed. As to the
  scene and period of action, little more was required for my purpose
  than the absence of established law and government, so that the agents
  might be at liberty to act on their own impulses. Nevertheless, I do
  remember, that having a wish to colour the manners in some degree from
  local history more than my knowledge enabled me to do, I read
  Redpath's 'History of the Borders', but found there nothing to my
  purpose. I once made an observation to Sir W. Scott, in which he
  concurred, that it was difficult to conceive how so dull a book could
  be written on such a subject. Much about the same time, but little
  after, Coleridge was employed in writing his tragedy of 'Remorse'; and
  it happened that soon after, through one of the Mr. Poole's, Mr.
  Knight, the actor, heard that we had been engaged in writing plays,
  and upon his suggestion, mine was curtailed, and I believe Coleridge's
  also, was offered to Mr. Harris, manager of Covent Garden. For myself,
  I had no hope, nor even a wish (though a successful play would in the
  then state of my finances have been a most welcome piece of good
  fortune), that he should accept my performance; so that I incurred no
  disappointment when the piece was _judiciously_ returned as not
  calculated for the stage. In this judgment I entirely concurred: and
  had it been otherwise, it was so natural for me to shrink from public
  notice, that any hope I might have had of success would not have
  reconciled me altogether to such an exhibition. Mr. C.'s play was, as
  is well known, brought forward several years after, through the
  kindness of Mr. Sheridan. In conclusion, I may observe, that while I
  was composing this play, I wrote a short essay, illustrative of that
  constitution and those tendencies of human nature which make the
  apparently 'motiveless' actions of bad men intelligible to careful
  observers. This was partly done with reference to the character of
  Oswald, and his persevering endeavour to lead the man he disliked into
  so heinous a crime; but still more to preserve in my distinct
  remembrance, what I had observed of transitions in character, and the
  reflections I had been led to make, during the time I was a witness of
  the changes through which the French Revolution passed.--I. F.]


'The Borderers' was first published in the 1842 edition of
"Poems, chiefly of Early and Late Years." In 1845, it was
placed in the class of "Poems written in Youth."--Ed.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


MARMADUKE. \
OSWALD.     |
WALLACE.    |- Of the Band of
LACY.       |    Borderers.
LENNOX.     |
HERBERT.   /

WILFRED,   Servant to MARMADUKE.
Host.
Forester.
ELDRED,    a Peasant.
Peasant, Pilgrims, etc.

IDONEA.
Female Beggar.
ELEANOR,   Wife to ELDRED.




SCENE--Borders of England and Scotland

TIME--The Reign of Henry III.




ACT I

SCENE--Road in a Wood

WALLACE and LACY



LACY          The Troop will be impatient; let us hie
              Back to our post, and strip the Scottish Foray
              Of their rich Spoil, ere they recross the Border.
             ---Pity that our young Chief will have no part
              In this good service.


WALLACE                      Rather let us grieve
              That, in the undertaking which has caused
              His absence, he hath sought, whate'er his aim,
              Companionship with One of crooked ways,
              From whose perverted soul can come no good
              To our confiding, open-hearted, Leader.


LACY          True; and, remembering how the Band have proved
              That Oswald finds small favour in our sight,
              Well may we wonder he has gained such power
              Over our much-loved Captain.


WALLACE                              I have heard
              Of some dark deed to which in early life
              His passion drove him--then a Voyager
              Upon the midland Sea. You knew his bearing
              In Palestine?


LACY            Where he despised alike
              Mohammedan and Christian. But enough;
              Let us begone--the Band may else be foiled.


[Exeunt.]

[Enter MARMADUKE and WILFRED]


WILFRED       Be cautious, my dear Master!


MARMADUKE                                 I perceive
              That fear is like a cloak which old men huddle
              About their love, as if to keep it warm.


WILFRED       Nay, but I grieve that we should part. This Stranger,
              For such he is--


MARMADUKE                       Your busy fancies, Wilfred,
              Might tempt me to a smile; but what of him?


WILFRED       You know that you have saved his life.


MARMADUKE     I know it.


WILFRED       And that he hates you!--Pardon me, perhaps
              That word was hasty.


MARMADUKE                          Fy! no more of it.


WILFRED       Dear Master! gratitude's a heavy burden
              To a proud Soul.--Nobody loves this Oswald--
              Yourself, you do not love him.


MARMADUKE                                     I do more,
              I honour him. Strong feelings to his heart
              Are natural; and from no one can be learnt
              More of man's thoughts and ways than his experience
              Has given him power to teach: and then for courage
              And enterprise--what perils hath he shunned?
              What obstacles hath he failed to overcome?
              Answer these questions, from our common knowledge,
              And be at rest.


WILFRED                        Oh, Sir!


MARMADUKE                                 Peace, my good Wilfred;
              Repair to Liddesdale, and tell the Band
              I shall be with them in two days, at farthest.


WILFRED       May He whose eye is over all protect you!


[Exit.]

[Enter OSWALD (a bunch of plants in his hand)]


OSWALD        This wood is rich in plants and curious simples.


MARMADUKE (looking at them)
              The wild rose, and the poppy, and the nightshade:
              Which is your favorite, Oswald?


OSWALD                                    That which, while it is
              Strong to destroy, is also strong to heal--
     [Looking forward.]
              Not yet in sight!--We'll saunter here awhile;
              They cannot mount the hill, by us unseen.


MARMADUKE (a letter in his hand)
              It is no common thing when one like you
              Performs these delicate services, and therefore
              I feel myself much bounden to you, Oswald;
              'Tis a strange letter this!--You saw her write it?


OSWALD        And saw the tears with which she blotted it.


MARMADUKE     And nothing less would satisfy him?


OSWALD                                           No less;
              For that another in his Child's affection
              Should hold a place, as if 'twere robbery,
              He seemed to quarrel with the very thought.
              Besides, I know not what strange prejudice
              Is rooted in his mind; this Band of ours,
              Which you've collected for the noblest ends,
              Along the confines of the Esk and Tweed
              To guard the Innocent--he calls us "Outlaws";
              And, for yourself, in plain terms he asserts
              This garb was taken up that indolence
              Might want no cover, and rapacity
              Be better fed.


MARMADUKE                    Ne'er may I own the heart
              That cannot feel for one, helpless as he is.


OSWALD        Thou know'st me for a Man not easily moved,
              Yet was I grievously provoked to think
              Of what I witnessed.


MARMADUKE                         This day will suffice
              To end her wrongs.


OSWALD                           But if the blind Man's tale
              Should _yet_ be true?


MARMADUKE                          Would it were possible!
              Did not the Soldier tell thee that himself,
              And others who survived the wreck, beheld
              The Baron Herbert perish in the waves
              Upon the coast of Cyprus?


OSWALD                                  Yes, even so,
              And I had heard the like before: in sooth
              The tale of this his quondam Barony
              Is cunningly devised; and, on the back
              Of his forlorn appearance, could not fail
              To make the proud and vain his tributaries,
              And stir the pulse of lazy charity.
              The seignories of Herbert are in Devon;
              We, neighbours of the Esk and Tweed; 'tis much
              The Arch-Impostor--


MARMADUKE                          Treat him gently, Oswald:
              Though I have never seen his face, methinks,
              There cannot come a day when I shall cease
              To love him. I remember, when a Boy
              Of scarcely seven years' growth, beneath the Elm
              That casts its shade over our village school,
              'Twas my delight to sit and hear Idonea
              Repeat her Father's terrible adventures,
              Till all the band of play-mates wept together;
              And that was the beginning of my love.
              And, through all converse of our later years,
              An image of this old Man still was present,
              When I had been most happy. Pardon me
              If this be idly spoken.


OSWALD                                  See, they come,
              Two Travellers!


MARMADUKE (points)                The woman [1] is Idonea.


OSWALD        And leading Herbert.


MARMADUKE                          We must let them pass--
              This thicket will conceal us.


[They step aside.]

[Enter IDONEA, leading HERBERT blind.]


IDONEA        Dear Father, you sigh deeply; ever since
              We left the willow shade by the brook-side,
              Your natural breathing has been troubled.


HERBERT       Nay,
              You are too fearful; yet must I confess,
              Our march of yesterday had better suited
              A firmer step than mine.


IDONEA                                That dismal Moor--
              In spite of all the larks that cheered our path,
              I never can forgive it: but how steadily
              _You_ paced along, when the bewildering moonlight
              Mocked me with many a strange fantastic shape!--
              I thought the Convent never would appear;
              It seemed to move away from us: and yet,
              That you are thus the fault is mine; for the air
              Was soft and warm, no dew lay on the grass,
              And midway on the waste ere night had fallen
              I spied a Covert walled and roofed with sods--
              A miniature; belike some Shepherd-boy,
              Who might have found a nothing-doing hour
              Heavier than work, raised it: within that hut
              We might have made a kindly bed of heath,
              And thankfully there rested side by side
              Wrapped in our cloaks, and, with recruited strength,
              Have hailed the morning sun. But cheerily, Father,--
              That staff of yours, I could almost have heart
              To fling't away from you: you make no use
              Of me, or of my strength;--come, let me feel
              That you do press upon me. There--indeed
              You are quite exhausted. Let us rest awhile
              On this green bank.


[He sits down.]


HERBERT (after some time)
                                  Idonea, you are silent,
              And I divine the cause.


IDONEA                              Do not reproach me:
              I pondered patiently your wish and will
              When I gave way to your request; and now,
              When I behold the ruins of that face,
              Those eyeballs dark--dark beyond hope of light,
              And think that they were blasted for my sake,
              The name of Marmaduke is blown away:
              Father, I would not change that sacred feeling
              For all this world can give.


HERBERT                                   Nay, be composed:
              Few minutes gone a faintness overspread
              My frame, and I bethought me of two things
              I ne'er had heart to separate--my grave,
              And thee, my Child!


IDONEA                            Believe me, honoured Sire!
              'Tis weariness that breeds these gloomy fancies,
              And you mistake the cause: you hear the woods
              Resound with music, could you see the sun,
              And look upon the pleasant face of Nature--


HERBERT       I comprehend thee--I should be as cheerful
              As if we two were twins; two songsters bred
              In the same nest, my spring-time one with thine.
              My fancies, fancies if they be, are such
              As come, dear Child! from a far deeper source
              Than bodily weariness. While here we sit
              I feel my strength returning.--The bequest
              Of thy kind Patroness, which to receive
              We have thus far adventured, will suffice
              To save thee from the extreme of penury;
              But when thy Father must lie down and die,
              How wilt thou stand alone?


IDONEA                                  Is he not strong?
              Is he not valiant?


HERBERT                            Am I then so soon
              Forgotten? have my warnings passed so quickly
              Out of thy mind? My dear, my only, Child;
              Thou wouldst be leaning on a broken reed--
              This Marmaduke--


IDONEA                         O could you hear his voice:
              Alas! you do not know him. He is one
              (I wot not what ill tongue has wronged him with you)
              All gentleness and love. His face bespeaks
              A deep and simple meekness: and that Soul,
              Which with the motion of a virtuous act
              Flashes a look of terror upon guilt,
              Is, after conflict, quiet as the ocean,
              By a miraculous finger, stilled at once.


HERBERT       Unhappy Woman!


IDONEA                       Nay, it was my duty
              Thus much to speak; but think not I forget--
              Dear Father! how _could_ I forget and live--
              You and the story of that doleful night
              When, Antioch blazing to her topmost towers,
              You rushed into the murderous flames, returned
              Blind as the grave, but, as you oft have told me,
              Clasping your infant Daughter to your heart.


HERBERT       Thy Mother too!--scarce had I gained the door,
              I caught her voice; she threw herself upon me,
              I felt thy infant brother in her arms;
              She saw my blasted face--a tide of soldiers
              That instant rushed between us, and I heard
              Her last death-shriek, distinct among a thousand.


IDONEA        Nay, Father, stop not; let me hear it all.


HERBERT       Dear Daughter! precious relic of that time--
              For my old age, it doth remain with thee
              To make it what thou wilt. Thou hast been told,
              That when, on our return from Palestine,
              I found how my domains had been usurped,
              I took thee in my arms, and we began
              Our wanderings together. Providence
              At length conducted us to Rossland,--there,
              Our melancholy story moved a Stranger
              To take thee to her home--and for myself,
              Soon after, the good Abbot of St. Cuthbert's
              Supplied my helplessness with food and raiment,
              And, as thou know'st, gave me that humble Cot
              Where now we dwell.--For many years I bore
              Thy absence, till old age and fresh infirmities
              Exacted thy return, and our reunion.
              I did not think that, during that long absence,
              My Child, forgetful of the name of Herbert,
              Had given her love to a wild Freebooter,
              Who here, upon the borders of the Tweed,
              Doth prey alike on two distracted Countries,
              Traitor to both.


IDONEA                         Oh, could you hear his voice!
              I will not call on Heaven to vouch for me,
              But let this kiss speak what is in my heart.


[Enter a Peasant]


PEASANT       Good morrow, Strangers! If you want a Guide,
              Let me have leave to serve you!


IDONEA                                       My Companion
              Hath need of rest; the sight of Hut or Hostel
              Would be most welcome.


PEASANT                             Yon white hawthorn gained,
              You will look down into a dell, and there
              Will see an ash from which a sign-board hangs;
              The house is hidden by the shade. Old Man,
              You seem worn out with travel--shall I support you?


HERBERT       I thank you; but, a resting-place so near,
              'Twere wrong to trouble you.


PEASANT                                   God speed you both.


[Exit Peasant.]


HERBERT       Idonea, we must part. Be not alarmed--
              'Tis but for a few days--a thought has struck me.


IDONEA        That I should leave you at this house, and thence
              Proceed alone. It shall be so; for strength
              Would fail you ere our journey's end be reached.


[Exit HERBERT supported by IDONEA.]

[Re-enter MARMADUKE and OSWALD]


MARMADUKE     This instant will we stop him--


OSWALD                                        Be not hasty,
              For, sometimes, in despite of my conviction,
              He tempted me to think the Story true;
              'Tis plain he loves the Maid, and what he said
              That savoured of aversion to thy name
              Appeared the genuine colour of his soul--
              Anxiety lest mischief should befal her
              After his death.


MARMADUKE
                               I have been much deceived.


OSWALD        But sure he loves the Maiden, and never love
              Could find delight to nurse itself so strangely,
              Thus to torment her with _inventions!_--death--
              There must be truth in this.


MARMADUKE                                 Truth in his story!
              He must have felt it then, known what it was,
              And in such wise to rack her gentle heart
              Had been a tenfold cruelty.


OSWALD                                    Strange pleasures
              Do we poor mortals cater for ourselves!
              To see him thus provoke her tenderness
              With tales of weakness and infirmity!
              I'd wager on his life for twenty years.


MARMADUKE     We will not waste an hour in such a cause.


OSWALD        Why, this is noble! shake her off at once.


MARMADUKE     Her virtues are his instruments.--A Man
              Who has so practised on the world's cold sense,
              May well deceive his Child--what! leave her thus,
              A prey to a deceiver?--no--no--no--
              'Tis but a word and then--


OSWALD                                   Something is here
              More than we see, or whence this strong aversion?
              Marmaduke! I suspect unworthy tales
              Have reached his ear--you have had enemies.


MARMADUKE     Enemies!--of his own coinage.


OSWALD                                      That may be,
              But wherefore slight protection such as you
              Have power to yield? perhaps he looks elsewhere.--
              I am perplexed.


MARMADUKE                    What hast thou heard or seen?


OSWALD        No--no--the thing stands clear of mystery;
              (As you have said) he coins himself the slander
              With which he taints her ear;--for a plain reason;
              He dreads the presence of a virtuous man
              Like you; he knows your eye would search his heart,
              Your justice stamp upon his evil deeds
              The punishment they merit. All is plain:
              It cannot be--


MARMADUKE
               What cannot be?


OSWALD                                Yet that a Father
              Should in his love admit no rivalship,
              And torture thus the heart of his own Child--


MARMADUKE     Nay, you abuse my friendship!


OSWALD                                     Heaven forbid!--
              There was a circumstance, trifling indeed--
              It struck me at the time--yet I believe
              I never should have thought of it again
              But for the scene which we by chance have witnessed.


MARMADUKE     What is your meaning?


OSWALD                              Two days gone I saw,
              Though at a distance and he was disguised,
              Hovering round Herbert's door, a man whose figure
              Resembled much that cold voluptuary,
              The villain, Clifford. He hates you, and he knows
              Where he can stab you deepest.


MARMADUKE                                   Clifford never
              Would stoop to skulk about a Cottage door--
              It could not be.


OSWALD                        And yet I now remember,
              That, when your praise was warm upon my tongue,
              And the blind Man was told how you had rescued
              A maiden from the ruffian violence
              Of this same Clifford, he became impatient
              And would not hear me.


MARMADUKE                             No--it cannot be--
              I dare not trust myself with such a thought--
              Yet whence this strange aversion? You are a man
              Not used to rash conjectures--


OSWALD                                      If you deem it
              A thing worth further notice, we must act
              With caution, sift the matter artfully.


[Exeunt MARMADUKE and OSWALD.]


SCENE--The door of the Hostel

HERBERT, IDONEA, and Host


HERBERT (seated)
              As I am dear to you, remember, Child!
              This last request.


IDONEA                         You know me, Sire; farewell!


HERBERT       And are you going then? Come, come, Idonea,
              We must not part,--I have measured many a league
              When these old limbs had need of rest,--and now
              I will not play the sluggard.


IDONEA                            Nay, sit down.
         [Turning to Host.
              Good Host, such tendance as you would expect
              From your own Children, if yourself were sick,
              Let this old Man find at your hands; poor Leader,
         [_Looking at the dog_.
              We soon shall meet again. If thou neglect
              This charge of thine, then ill befall thee!--Look,
              The little fool is loth to stay behind.
              Sir Host! by all the love you bear to courtesy,
              Take care of him, and feed the truant well.


HOST          Fear not, I will obey you;--but One so young,
              And One so fair, it goes against my heart
              That you should travel unattended, Lady!--
              I have a palfrey and a groom: the lad
              Shall squire you, (would it not be better, Sir?)
              And for less fee than I would let him run
              For any lady I have seen this twelvemonth.


IDONEA        You know, Sir, I have been too long your guard
              Not to have learnt to laugh at little fears.
              Why, if a wolf should leap from out a thicket,
              A look of mine would send him scouring back,
              Unless I differ from the thing I am
              When you are by my side.


HERBERT                                Idonea, wolves
              Are not the enemies that move my fears.


IDONEA        No more, I pray, of this. Three days at farthest
              Will bring me back--protect him, Saints--farewell!


[Exit IDONEA.]


HOST         'Tis never drought with us--St. Cuthbert and his Pilgrims,
              Thanks to them, are to us a stream of comfort:
              Pity the Maiden did not wait awhile;
              She could not, Sir, have failed of company.


HERBERT       Now she is gone, I fain would call her back.


HOST (calling)      Holla!


HERBERT       No, no, the business must be done.--
              What means this riotous noise?

HOST                                       The villagers
              Are flocking in--a wedding festival--
              That's all--God save you, Sir.


[Enter OSWALD]


OSWALD                                   Ha! as I live,
              The Baron Herbert.


HOST                            Mercy, the Baron Herbert!


OSWALD       So far into your journey! on my life,
             You are a lusty Traveller. But how fare you?


HERBERT      Well as the wreck I am permits. And you, Sir?


OSWALD       I do not see Idonea.


HERBERT                            Dutiful Girl,
              She is gone before, to spare my weariness.
              But what has brought you hither?


OSWALD                                       A slight affair,
              That will be soon despatched.


HERBERT                                    Did Marmaduke
              Receive that letter?


OSWALD                             Be at peace.--The tie
              Is broken, you will hear no more of _him_.


HERBERT       This is true comfort, thanks a thousand times!--
              That noise!--would I had gone with her as far
              As the Lord Clifford's Castle: I have heard
              That, in his milder moods, he has expressed
              Compassion for me. His influence is great
              With Henry, our good King;--the Baron might
              Have heard my suit, and urged my plea at Court.
              No matter--he's a dangerous Man.--That noise!--
              'Tis too disorderly for sleep or rest.
              Idonea would have fears for me,--the Convent
              Will give me quiet lodging. You have a boy, good Host,
              And he must lead me back.


OSWALD                                 You are most lucky;
              I have been waiting in the wood hard by
              For a companion--here he comes; our journey
        [Enter MARMADUKE]
              Lies on your way; accept us as your Guides.


HERBERT       Alas! I creep so slowly.


OSWALD                                 Never fear;
              We'll not complain of that.


HERBERT                                  My limbs are stiff
              And need repose. Could you but wait an hour?


OSWALD        Most willingly!--Come, let me lead you in,
              And, while you take your rest, think not of us;
              We'll stroll into the wood; lean on my arm.


[Conducts HERBERT into the house. Exit MARMADUKE.]

[Enter Villagers]


OSWALD (to himself, coming out of the Hostel)
              I have prepared a most apt Instrument--
              The Vagrant must, no doubt, be loitering somewhere
              About this ground; she hath a tongue well skilled,
              By mingling natural matter of her own
              With all the daring fictions I have taught her,
              To win belief, such as my plot requires.


[Exit OSWALD.]

[Enter more Villagers, a Musician among them]


HOST (to them)
              Into the court, my Friend, and perch yourself
              Aloft upon the elm-tree. Pretty Maids,
              Garlands and flowers, and cakes and merry thoughts,
              Are here, to send the sun into the west
              More speedily than you belike would wish.


SCENE changes to the Wood adjoining the Hostel--

[MARMADUKE and OSWALD entering]


MARMADUKE     I would fain hope that we deceive ourselves:
              When first I saw him sitting there, alone,
              It struck upon my heart I know not how.


OSWALD        To-day will clear up all.--You marked a Cottage,
              That ragged Dwelling, close beneath a rock
              By the brook-side: it is the abode of One,
              A Maiden innocent till ensnared by Clifford,
              Who soon grew weary of her; but, alas!
              What she had seen and suffered turned her brain.
              Cast off by her Betrayer, she dwells alone,
              Nor moves her hands to any needful work:
              She eats her food which every day the peasants
              Bring to her hut; and so the Wretch has lived
              Ten years; and no one ever heard her voice;
              But every night at the first stroke of twelve
              She quits her house, and, in the neighbouring Churchyard
              Upon the self-same spot, in rain or storm,
              She paces out the hour 'twixt twelve and one--
              She paces round and round an Infant's grave,
              And in the Churchyard sod her feet have worn
              A hollow ring; they say it is knee-deep--
              Ah! [1] what is here?


[A female Beggar rises up, rubbing her eyes as if in sleep--a Child in
her arms.]


BEGGAR        O Gentlemen, I thank you;
              I've had the saddest dream that ever troubled
              The heart of living creature.--My poor Babe
              Was crying, as I thought, crying for bread
              When I had none to give him; whereupon,
              I put a slip of foxglove in his hand,
              Which pleased him so, that he was hushed at once:
              When, into one of those same spotted bells
              A bee came darting, which the Child with joy
              Imprisoned there, and held it to his ear,
              And suddenly grew black, as he would die.


MARMADUKE     We have no time for this, my babbling Gossip;
              Here's what will comfort you.
       [Gives her money.]


BEGGAR                                     The Saints reward you
              For this good deed!--Well, Sirs, this passed away;
              And afterwards I fancied, a strange dog,
              Trotting alone along the beaten road,
              Came to my child as by my side he slept
              And, fondling, licked his face, then on a sudden
              Snapped fierce to make a morsel of his head:
              But here he is,
     [kissing the Child]
                             it must have been a dream.


OSWALD        When next inclined to sleep, take my advice,
              And put your head, good Woman, under cover.


BEGGAR        Oh, Sir, you would not talk thus, if you knew
              What life is this of ours, how sleep will master
              The weary-worn.--You gentlefolk have got
              Warm chambers to your wish. I'd rather be
              A stone than what I am.--But two nights gone,
              The darkness overtook me--wind and rain
              Beat hard upon my head--and yet I saw
              A glow-worm, through the covert of the furze,
              Shine calmly as if nothing ailed the sky:
              At which I half accused the God in Heaven.--
              You must forgive me.


OSWALD                             Ay, and if you think
              The Fairies are to blame, and you should chide
              Your favourite saint--no matter--this good day
              Has made amends.


BEGGAR                       Thanks to you both; but, Oh Sir!
              How would you like to travel on whole hours
              As I have done, my eyes upon the ground,
              Expecting still, I knew not how, to find
              A piece of money glittering through the dust.


MARMADUKE     This woman is a prater. Pray, good Lady!
              Do you tell fortunes?


BEGGAR                              Oh Sir, you are like the rest.
              This Little-one--it cuts me to the heart--
              Well! they might turn a beggar from their doors,
              But there are Mothers who can see the Babe
              Here at my breast, and ask me where I bought it:
              This they can do, and look upon my face--
              But you, Sir, should be kinder.


MARMADUKE                                    Come hither, Fathers,
              And learn what nature is from this poor Wretch!


BEGGAR        Ay, Sir, there's nobody that feels for us.
              Why now--but yesterday I overtook
              A blind old Greybeard and accosted him,
              I' th' name of all the Saints, and by the Mass
              He should have used me better!--Charity!
              If you can melt a rock, he is your man;
              But I'll be even with him--here again
              Have I been waiting for him.


OSWALD                                      Well, but softly,
              Who is it that hath wronged you?


BEGGAR                                        Mark you me;
              I'll point him out;--a Maiden is his guide,
              Lovely as Spring's first rose; a little dog,
              Tied by a woollen cord, moves on before
              With look as sad as he were dumb; the cur,
              I owe him no ill will, but in good sooth
              He does his Master credit.


MARMADUKE                               As I live,
              'Tis Herbert and no other!


BEGGAR                                 'Tis a feast to see him,
              Lank as a ghost and tall, his shoulders bent,
              And long beard white with age--yet evermore,
              As if he were the only Saint on earth,
              He turns his face to heaven.


OSWALD                                   But why so violent
             Against this venerable Man?


BEGGAR                                   I'll tell you:
              He has the very hardest heart on earth;
              I had as lief turn to the Friar's school
              And knock for entrance, in mid holiday.


MARMADUKE     But to your story.


BEGGAR                         I was saying, Sir--
              Well!--he has often spurned me like a toad,
              But yesterday was worse than all;--at last
              I overtook him, Sirs, my Babe and I,
              And begged a little aid for charity:
              But he was snappish as a cottage cur.
              Well then, says I--I'll out with it; at which
              I cast a look upon the Girl, and felt
              As if my heart would burst; and so I left him.


OSWALD        I think, good Woman, you are the very person
              Whom, but some few days past, I saw in Eskdale,
              At Herbert's door.


BEGGAR                          Ay; and if truth were known
              I have good business there.


OSWALD                                  I met you at the threshold,
              And he seemed angry.


BEGGAR                             Angry! well he might;
              And long as I can stir I'll dog him.--Yesterday,
              To serve me so, and knowing that he owes
              The best of all he has to me and mine.
              But 'tis all over now.--That good old Lady
              Has left a power of riches; and I say it,
              If there's a lawyer in the land, the knave
              Shall give me half.


OSWALD                          What's this?--I fear, good Woman,
              You have been insolent.


BEGGAR                                And there's the Baron,
              I spied him skulking in his peasant's dress.


OSWALD        How say you? in disguise?--


MARMADUKE                             But what's your business
             With Herbert or his Daughter?


BEGGAR                                     Daughter! truly--
              But how's the day?--I fear, my little Boy,
              We've overslept ourselves.--Sirs, have you seen him?
      [Offers to go.]


MARMADUKE     I must have more of this;--you shall not stir
              An inch, till I am answered. Know you aught
              That doth concern this Herbert?


BEGGAR                                       You are provoked,
              And will misuse me, Sir!


MARMADUKE                              No trifling, Woman!--


OSWALD        You are as safe as in a sanctuary;
              Speak.


MARMADUKE           Speak!


BEGGAR                     He is a most hard-hearted Man.


MARMADUKE     Your life is at my mercy.


BEGGAR                                   Do not harm me,
              And I will tell you all!--You know not, Sir,
              What strong temptations press upon the Poor.


OSWALD        Speak out.


BEGGAR                    O Sir, I've been a wicked Woman.


OSWALD        Nay, but speak out!


BEGGAR                            He flattered me, and said
              What harvest it would bring us both; and so,
              I parted with the Child.


MARMADUKE                             Parted with whom? [3]


BEGGAR        Idonea, as he calls her; but the Girl
              Is mine.


MARMADUKE             Yours, Woman! are you Herbert's wife?


BEGGAR        Wife, Sir! his wife--not I; my husband, Sir,
              Was of Kirkoswald--many a snowy winter
              We've weathered out together. My poor Gilfred!
              He has been two years in his grave.


MARMADUKE                                         Enough.


OSWALD        We've solved the riddle--Miscreant!


MARMADUKE                                         Do you,
              Good Dame, repair to Liddesdale and wait
              For my return; be sure you shall have justice.


OSWALD        A lucky woman!--go, you have done good service.
                                                         [Aside.]


MARMADUKE (to himself)
              Eternal praises on the power that saved her!--


OSWALD (gives her money)
              Here's for your little boy--and when you christen him
              I'll be his Godfather.

BEGGAR                               O Sir, you are merry with me.
              In grange or farm this Hundred scarcely owns
              A dog that does not know me.--These good Folks,
              For love of God, I must not pass their doors;
              But I'll be back with my best speed: for you--
              God bless and thank you both, my gentle Masters.


    [Exit Beggar.]


MARMADUKE (to himself)
              The cruel Viper!--Poor devoted Maid,
              Now I _do_ love thee.


OSWALD                             I am thunderstruck.


MARMADUKE     Where is she--holla!
    [Calling to the Beggar, who returns; he looks at  her stedfastly.]
              You are Idonea's Mother?--
              Nay, be not terrified--it does me good
              To look upon you.


OSWALD (interrupting)
                                In a peasant's dress
              You saw, who was it?


BEGGAR                             Nay, I dare not speak;
              He is a man, if it should come to his ears
              I never shall be heard of more.

OSWALD                                        Lord Clifford?


BEGGAR        What can I do? believe me, gentle Sirs,
              I love her, though I dare not call her daughter.


OSWALD        Lord Clifford--did you see him talk with Herbert?


BEGGAR        Yes, to my sorrow--under the great oak
              At Herbert's door--and when he stood beside
              The blind Man--at the silent Girl he looked
              With such a look--it makes me tremble, Sir,
              To think of it.


OSWALD                        Enough! you may depart.


MARMADUKE (to himself)
              Father!--to God himself we cannot give
              A holier name; and, under such a mask,
              To lead a Spirit, spotless as the blessed,
              To that abhorred den of brutish vice!--
              Oswald, the firm foundation of my life
              Is going from under me; these strange discoveries--
              Looked at from every point of fear or hope,
              Duty, or love--involve, I feel, my ruin.




ACT II

SCENE--A Chamber in the Hostel--OSWALD alone, rising from a Table on
which he had been writing.


OSWALD        They chose _him_ for their Chief!--what covert part
              He, in the preference, modest Youth, might take,
              I neither know nor care. The insult bred
              More of contempt than hatred; both are flown;
              That either e'er existed is my shame:
              'Twas a dull spark--a most unnatural fire
              That died the moment the air breathed upon it.
             --These fools of feeling are mere birds of winter
              That haunt some barren island of the north,
              Where, if a famishing man stretch forth his hand,
              They think it is to feed them. I have left him
              To solitary meditation;--now
              For a few swelling phrases, and a flash
              Of truth, enough to dazzle and to blind,
              And he is mine for ever--here he comes.


[Enter MARMADUKE.]


MARMADUKE     These ten years she has moved her lips all day
              And never speaks!


OSWALD                          Who is it?


MARMADUKE                                  I have seen her.


OSWALD        Oh! the poor tenant of that ragged homestead,
              Her whom the Monster, Clifford, drove to madness.


MARMADUKE     I met a peasant near the spot; he told me,
              These ten years she had sate all day alone
              Within those empty walls.


OSWALD                                   I too have seen her;
              Chancing to pass this way some six months gone,
              At midnight, I betook me to the Churchyard:
              The moon shone clear, the air was still, so still
              The trees were silent as the graves beneath them.
              Long did I watch, and saw her pacing round
              Upon the self-same spot, still round and round,
              Her lips for ever moving.


MARMADUKE                              At her door
              Rooted I stood; for, looking at the woman,
              I thought I saw the skeleton of Idonea.


OSWALD        But the pretended Father--


MARMADUKE                               Earthly law
              Measures not crimes like his.


OSWALD                                    _We_ rank not, happily,
              With those who take the spirit of their rule
              From that soft class of devotees who feel
              Reverence for life so deeply, that they spare
              The verminous brood, and cherish what they spare
              While feeding on their bodies. Would that Idonea
              Were present, to the end that we might hear
              What she can urge in his defence; she loves him.


MARMADUKE     Yes, loves him; 'tis a truth that multiplies
              His guilt a thousand-fold.


OSWALD       'Tis most perplexing:
              What must be done?


MARMADUKE     We will conduct her hither;
              These walls shall witness it--from first to last
              He shall reveal himself.


OSWALD                                Happy are we,
              Who live in these disputed tracts, that own
              No law but what each man makes for himself;
              Here justice has indeed a field of triumph.


MARMADUKE     Let us begone and bring her hither;--here
              The truth shall be laid open, his guilt proved
              Before her face. The rest be left to me.

OSWALD        You will be firm: but though we well may trust
              The issue to the justice of the cause,
              Caution must not be flung aside; remember,
              Yours is no common life. Self-stationed here,
              Upon these savage confines, we have seen you
              Stand like an isthmus 'twixt two stormy seas
              That oft have checked their fury at your bidding.
              'Mid the deep holds of Solway's mossy waste,
              Your single virtue has transformed a Band
              Of fierce barbarians into Ministers
              Of peace and order. Aged men with tears
              Have blessed their steps, the fatherless retire
              For shelter to their banners. But it is,
              As you must needs have deeply felt, it is
              In darkness and in tempest that we seek
              The majesty of Him who rules the world.
              Benevolence, that has not heart to use
              The wholesome ministry of pain and evil,
              Becomes at last weak and contemptible.
              Your generous qualities have won due praise,
              But vigorous Spirits look for something more
              Than Youth's spontaneous products; and to-day
              You will not disappoint them; and hereafter--


MARMADUKE     You are wasting words; hear me then, once for all:
              You are a Man--and therefore, if compassion,
              Which to our kind is natural as life,
              Be known unto you, you will love this Woman,
              Even as I do; but I should loathe the light,
              If I could think one weak or partial feeling--


OSWALD        You will forgive me--


MARMADUKE                            If I ever knew
              My heart, could penetrate its inmost core,
              'Tis at this moment.--Oswald, I have loved
              To be the friend and father of the oppressed,
              A comforter of sorrow;--there is something
              Which looks like a transition in my soul,
              And yet it is not.--Let us lead him hither.


OSWALD        Stoop for a moment; 'tis an act of justice;
              And where's the triumph if the delegate
              Must fall in the execution of his office?
              The deed is done--if you will have it so--
              Here where we stand--that tribe of vulgar wretches
              (You saw them gathering for the festival)
              Rush in--the villains seize us--


MARMADUKE     Seize!


OSWALD                Yes, they--
              Men who are little given to sift and weigh--
              Would wreak on us the passion of the moment.


MARMADUKE     The cloud will soon disperse--farewell--but stay,
              Thou wilt relate the story.


OSWALD        Am I neither
              To bear a part in this Man's punishment,
              Nor be its witness?


MARMADUKE     I had many hopes
              That were most dear to me, and some will bear
              To be transferred to thee.


OSWALD        When I'm dishonoured!


MARMADUKE     I would preserve thee. How may this be done?


OSWALD        By showing that you look beyond the instant.
              A few leagues hence we shall have open ground,
              And nowhere upon earth is place so fit
              To look upon the deed. Before we enter
              The barren Moor, hangs from a beetling rock
              The shattered Castle in which Clifford oft
              Has held infernal orgies--with the gloom,
              And very superstition of the place,
              Seasoning his wickedness. The Debauchee
              Would there perhaps have gathered the first fruits
              Of this mock Father's guilt.


[Enter Host conducting HERBERT.]


HOST                                     The Baron Herbert
              Attends your pleasure.


OSWALD (to Host)
              We are ready--
       (to HERBERT) Sir!
              I hope you are refreshed.--I have just written
              A notice for your Daughter, that she may know
              What is become of you.--You'll sit down and sign it;
              'Twill glad her heart to see her father's signature.
       [Gives the letter he had written.]


HERBERT        Thanks for your care.


    [Sits down and writes. Exit Host.]


OSWALD (aside to MARMADUKE)
               Perhaps it would be useful
              That you too should subscribe your name.
[MARMADUKE overlooks HERBERT--then writes--examines the letter eagerly.]


MARMADUKE      I cannot leave this paper.


    [He puts it up, agitated.]


OSWALD (aside)
              Dastard! Come.


    [MARMADUKE goes towards HERBERT and supports him--MARMADUKE
    tremblingly beckons OSWALD to take his place.]


MARMADUKE (as he quits HERBERT)
              There is a palsy in his limbs--he shakes.


    [Exeunt OSWALD and HERBERT--MARMADUKE following.]


SCENE changes to a Wood--a Group of Pilgrims, and IDONEA with them.


FIRST PILGRIM   A grove of darker and more lofty shade
                I never saw.


SECOND PILGRIM               The music of the birds
                Drops deadened from a roof so thick with leaves.


OLD PILGRIM     This news! It made my heart leap up with joy.


IDONEA          I scarcely can believe it.


OLD PILGRIM                                Myself, I heard
                The Sheriff read, in open Court, a letter
                Which purported it was the royal pleasure
                The Baron Herbert, who, as was supposed,
                Had taken refuge in this neighbourhood,
                Should be forthwith restored. The hearing, Lady,
                Filled my dim eyes with tears.--When I returned
                From Palestine, and brought with me a heart,
                Though rich in heavenly, poor in earthly, comfort,
                I met your Father, then a wandering Outcast:
                He had a Guide, a Shepherd's boy; but grieved
                He was that One so young should pass his youth
                In such sad service; and he parted with him.
                We joined our tales of wretchedness together,
                And begged our daily bread from door to door.
                I talk familiarly to you, sweet Lady!
                For once you loved me.


IDONEA                                 You shall back with me
                And see your Friend again. The good old Man
                Will be rejoiced to greet you.


OLD PILGRIM                            It seems but yesterday
                That a fierce storm o'ertook us, worn with travel,
                In a deep wood remote from any town.
                A cave that opened to the road presented
                A friendly shelter, and we entered in.


IDONEA          And I was with you?


OLD PILGRIM                        If indeed 'twas you--
                But you were then a tottering Little-one--
                We sate us down. The sky grew dark and darker:
                I struck my flint, and built up a small fire
                With rotten boughs and leaves, such as the winds
                Of many autumns in the cave had piled.
                Meanwhile the storm fell heavy on the woods;
                Our little fire sent forth a cheering warmth
                And we were comforted, and talked of comfort;
                But 'twas an angry night, and o'er our heads
                The thunder rolled in peals that would have made
                A sleeping man uneasy in his bed.
                O Lady, you have need to love your Father.
                His voice--methinks I hear it now, his voice
                When, after a broad flash that filled the cave,
                He said to me, that he had seen his Child,
                A face (no cherub's face more beautiful)
                Revealed by lustre brought with it from heaven;
                And it was you, dear Lady!


IDONEA                                    God be praised,
                That I have been his comforter till now!
                And will be so through every change of fortune
                And every sacrifice his peace requires.--
                Let us be gone with speed, that he may hear
                These joyful tidings from no lips but mine.


    [Exeunt IDONEA and Pilgrims.]




SCENE--The Area of a half-ruined Castle--on one side the entrance to a
dungeon--OSWALD and MARMADUKE pacing backwards and forwards.



MARMADUKE     'Tis a wild night.


OSWALD                           I'd give my cloak and bonnet
              For sight of a warm fire.


MARMADUKE                              The wind blows keen;
              My hands are numb.


OSWALD                           Ha! ha! 'tis nipping cold.
     [Blowing his fingers.]
              I long for news of our brave Comrades; Lacy
              Would drive those Scottish Rovers to their dens
              If once they blew a horn this side the Tweed.


MARMADUKE     I think I see a second range of Towers;
              This castle has another Area--come,
              Let us examine it.


OSWALD                          'Tis a bitter night;
              I hope Idonea is well housed. That horseman,
              Who at full speed swept by us where the wood
              Roared in the tempest, was within an ace
              Of sending to his grave our precious Charge:
              That would have been a vile mischance.


MARMADUKE     It would.


OSWALD                Justice had been most cruelly defrauded.


MARMADUKE     Most cruelly.


OSWALD                      As up the steep we clomb,
              I saw a distant fire in the north-east;
              I took it for the blaze of Cheviot Beacon:
              With proper speed our quarters may be gained
              To-morrow evening.

    [He looks restlessly towards the mouth of the dungeon.]


MARMADUKE                       When, upon the plank,
              I had led him 'cross [4] the torrent, his voice blessed me:
              You could not hear, for the foam beat the rocks
              With deafening noise,--the benediction fell
              Back on himself; but changed into a curse.


OSWALD        As well indeed it might.


MARMADUKE                             And this you deem
              The fittest place?


OSWALD (aside)
              He is growing pitiful.


MARMADUKE (listening)
              What an odd moaning that is!--

OSWALD.                                     Mighty odd
              The wind should pipe a little, while we stand
              Cooling our heels in this way!--I'll begin
              And count the stars.


MARMADUKE (still listening)
                                  That dog of his, you are sure,
              Could not come after us--he _must_ have perished;
              The torrent would have dashed an oak to splinters.
              You said you did not like his looks--that he
              Would trouble us; if he were here again,
              I swear the sight of him would quail me more
              Than twenty armies.


OSWALD                            How?


MARMADUKE                              The old blind Man,
              When you had told him the mischance, was troubled
              Even to the shedding of some natural tears
              Into the torrent over which he hung,
              Listening in vain.


OSWALD                             He has a tender heart!


    [OSWALD offers to go down into the dungeon.]


MARMADUKE     How now, what mean you?


OSWALD                                Truly, I was going
              To waken our stray Baron. Were there not
              A farm or dwelling-house within five leagues,
              We should deserve to wear a cap and bells,
              Three good round years, for playing the fool here
              In such a night as this.


MARMADUKE                              Stop, stop.


OSWALD                                             Perhaps,
              You'd better like we should descend together,
              And lie down by his side--what say you to it?
              Three of us--we should keep each other warm:
              I'll answer for it that our four-legged friend
              Shall not disturb us; further I'll not engage;
              Come, come, for manhood's sake!


MARMADUKE                                 These drowsy shiverings,
              This mortal stupor which is creeping over me,
              What do they mean? were this my single body
              Opposed to armies, not a nerve would tremble:
              Why do I tremble now?--Is not the depth
              Of this Man's crimes beyond the reach of thought?
              And yet, in plumbing the abyss for judgment,
              Something I strike upon which turns my mind
              Back on herself, I think, again--my breast
              Concentres all the terrors of the Universe:
              I look at him and tremble like a child.


OSWALD        Is it possible?


MARMADUKE                     One thing you noticed not:
              Just as we left the glen a clap of thunder
              Burst on the mountains with hell-rousing force.
              This is a time, said he, when guilt may shudder;
              But there's a Providence for them who walk
              In helplessness, when innocence is with them.
              At this audacious blasphemy, I thought
              The spirit of vengeance seemed to ride the air.


OSWALD        Why are you not the man you were that moment?


    [He draws MARMADUKE to the dungeon.]


MARMADUKE     You say he was asleep,--look at this arm,
              And tell me if 'tis fit for such a work.
              Oswald, Oswald!
       [Leans upon OSWALD.]


OSWALD                       This is some sudden seizure!


MARMADUKE     A most strange faintness,--will you hunt me out
              A draught of water?


OSWALD                           Nay, to see you thus
              Moves me beyond my bearing.--I will try
              To gain the torrent's brink.


[Exit OSWALD.]


MARMADUKE (after a pause)
                                     It seems an age
              Since that Man left me.--No, I am not lost.


HERBERT (at the mouth of the dungeon)
              Give me your hand; where are you, Friends? and tell me
              How goes the night.


MARMADUKE                      'Tis hard to measure time,
              In such a weary night, and such a place.


HERBERT       I do not hear the voice of my friend Oswald.

MARMADUKE     A minute past, he went to fetch a draught
              Of water from the torrent. 'Tis, you'll say,
              A cheerless beverage.


HERBERT                              How good it was in you
              To stay behind!--Hearing at first no answer,
              I was alarmed.


MARMADUKE                    No wonder; this is a place
              That well may put some fears into _your_ heart.


HERBERT       Why so? a roofless rock had been a comfort,
              Storm-beaten and bewildered as we were;
              And in a night like this, to lend your cloaks
              To make a bed for me!--My Girl will weep
              When she is told of it.

MARMADUKE                            This Daughter of yours
              Is very dear to you.


HERBERT                            Oh! but you are young;
              Over your head twice twenty years must roll,
              With all their natural weight of sorrow and pain,
              Ere can be known to you how much a Father
              May love his Child.

MARMADUKE
              Thank you, old Man, for this! [Aside.]


HERBERT       Fallen am I, and worn out, a useless Man;
              Kindly have you protected me to-night,
              And no return have I to make but prayers;
              May you in age be blest with such a daughter!--
              When from the Holy Land I had returned
              Sightless, and from my heritage was driven,
              A wretched Outcast--but this strain of thought
              Would lead me to talk fondly.


MARMADUKE                                   Do not fear;
              Your words are precious to my ears; go on.


HERBERT       You will forgive me, but my heart runs over.
              When my old Leader slipped into the flood
              And perished, what a piercing outcry you
              Sent after him. I have loved you ever since.
              You start--where are we?


MARMADUKE                             Oh, there is no danger;
              The cold blast struck me.


HERBERT
                                      'Twas a foolish question.


MARMADUKE     But when you were an Outcast?--Heaven is just;
              Your piety would not miss its due reward;
              The little Orphan then would be your succour,
              And do good service, though she knew it not.


HERBERT       I turned me from the dwellings of my Fathers,
              Where none but those who trampled on my rights
              Seemed to remember me. To the wide world
              I bore her, in my arms; her looks won pity;
              She was my Raven in the wilderness,
              And brought me food. Have I not cause to love her?

MARMADUKE     Yes.


HERBERT            More than ever Parent loved a Child?


MARMADUKE     Yes, yes.


HERBERT                 I will not murmur, merciful God!
              I will not murmur; blasted as I have been,
              Thou hast left me ears to hear my Daughter's voice,
              And arms to fold her to my heart. Submissively
              Thee I adore, and find my rest in faith.


[Enter OSWALD.]


OSWALD        Herbert!--confusion! (aside).
                                           Here it is, my Friend,
     [Presents the Horn.]
              A charming beverage for you to carouse,
              This bitter night.


HERBERT                          Ha! Oswald! ten bright crosses
              I would have given, not many minutes gone,
              To have heard your voice.


OSWALD                              Your couch, I fear, good Baron,
              Has been but comfortless; and yet that place,
              When the tempestuous wind first drove us hither,
              Felt warm as a wren's nest. You'd better turn
              And under covert rest till break of day,
              Or till the storm abate.
          (To MARMADUKE aside.) He has restored you.
              No doubt you have been nobly entertained?
              But soft!--how came he forth? The Night-mare Conscience
              Has driven him out of harbour?


MARMADUKE                                   I believe
              You have guessed right.


HERBERT                              The trees renew their murmur:
              Come, let us house together.


    [OSWALD conducts him to the dungeon.]


OSWALD (returns)
                                            Had I not
              Esteemed you worthy to conduct the affair
              To its most fit conclusion, do you think
              I would so long have struggled with my Nature,
              And smothered all that's man in me?--away!--
     [Looking towards the dungeon.]
              This man's the property of him who best
              Can feel his crimes. I have resigned a privilege;
              It now becomes my duty to resume it.


MARMADUKE     Touch not a finger--


OSWALD                             What then must be done?


MARMADUKE     Which way soe'er I turn, I am perplexed.


OSWALD        Now, on my life, I grieve for you. The misery
              Of doubt is insupportable. Pity, the facts
              Did not admit of stronger evidence;
              Twelve honest men, plain men, would set us right;
              Their verdict would abolish these weak scruples.


MARMADUKE     Weak! I am weak--there does my torment lie,
              Feeding itself.


OSWALD                          Verily, when he said
              How his old heart would leap to hear her steps,
              You thought his voice the echo of Idonea's.


MARMADUKE     And never heard a sound so terrible.


OSWALD        Perchance you think so now?


MARMADUKE                                  I cannot do it:
              Twice did I spring to grasp his withered throat,
              When such a sudden weakness fell upon me,
              I could have dropped asleep upon his breast.


OSWALD        Justice--is there not thunder in the word?
              Shall it be law to stab the petty robber
              Who aims but at our purse; and shall this Parricide--
              Worse is he far, far worse (if foul dishonour
              Be worse than death) to that confiding Creature
              Whom he to more than filial love and duty
              Hath falsely trained--shall he fulfil his purpose?
              But you are fallen.


MARMADUKE                         Fallen should I be indeed--
              Murder--perhaps asleep, blind, old, alone,
              Betrayed, in darkness! Here to strike the blow--
              Away! away!--

[Flings away his sword.]


OSWALD                       Nay, I have done with you:
              We'll lead him to the Convent. He shall live,
              And she shall love him. With unquestioned title
              He shall be seated in his Barony,
              And we too chant the praise of his good deeds.
              I now perceive we do mistake our masters,
              And most despise the men who best can teach us:
              Henceforth it shall be said that bad men only
              Are brave: Clifford is brave; and that old Man
              Is brave.
      [Taking MARMADUKE'S sword and giving it to him.]
                        To Clifford's arms he would have led
              His Victim--haply to this desolate house.


MARMADUKE (advancing to the dungeon)
              It must be ended!--


OSWALD                           Softly; do not rouse him;
              He will deny it to the last. He lies
              Within the Vault, a spear's length to the left.
   [MARMADUKE descends to the dungeon.]
     (Alone.) The Villains rose in mutiny to destroy me;
              I could have quelled the Cowards, but this Stripling
              Must needs step in, and save my life. The look
              With which he gave the boon--I see it now!
              The same that tempted me to loathe the gift.--
              For this old venerable Grey-beard--faith
              'Tis his own fault if he hath got a face
              Which doth play tricks with them that look on it:
              'Twas this that put it in my thoughts--that countenance--
              His staff--his figure--Murder!--what, of whom?
              We kill a worn-out horse, and who but women
              Sigh at the deed? Hew down a withered tree,
              And none look grave but dotards. He may live
              To thank me for this service. Rainbow arches,
              Highways of dreaming passion, have too long,
              Young as he is, diverted wish and hope
              From the unpretending ground we mortals tread;--
              Then shatter the delusion, break it up
              And set him free. What follows? I have learned
              That things will work to ends the slaves o' the world
              Do never dream of. I _have_ been what he--
              This Boy--when he comes forth with bloody hands--
              Might envy, and am now,--but he shall know
              What I am now--
        [Goes and listens at the dungeon.]
                                 Praying or parleying?--tut!
              Is he not eyeless? He has been half-dead
              These fifteen years--

       [Enter female Beggar with two or three of her Companions.]

     (Turning abruptly.) Ha! speak--what Thing art thou?
  (Recognises her.) Heavens! my good friend!    [To her.]


BEGGAR                               Forgive me, gracious Sir!--


OSWALD (to her companions)
              Begone, ye Slaves, or I will raise a whirlwind
              And send ye dancing to the clouds, like leaves.
        [They retire affrighted.]


BEGGAR        Indeed we meant no harm; we lodge sometimes
              In this deserted Castle--_I repent me._


    [OSWALD goes to the dungeon--listens--returns to the Beggar.]


OSWALD        Woman, thou hast a helpless Infant--keep
              Thy secret for its sake, or verily
              That wretched life of thine shall be the forfeit.


BEGGAR        I _do_ repent me, Sir; I fear the curse
              Of that blind Man. 'Twas not your money, Sir,--


OSWALD        Begone!


BEGGAR (going)
              There is some wicked deed in hand:
         [Aside.]
              Would I could find the old Man and his Daughter.


         [Exit Beggar.]


[MARMADUKE re-enters from the dungeon]


OSWALD        It is all over then;--your foolish fears
              Are hushed to sleep, by your own act and deed,
              Made quiet as he is.


MARMADUKE                           Why came you down?
              And when I felt your hand upon my arm
              And spake to you, why did you give no answer?
              Feared you to waken him? he must have been
              In a deep sleep. I whispered to him thrice.
              There are the strangest echoes in that place!


OSWALD        Tut! let them gabble till the day of doom.


MARMADUKE     Scarcely, by groping, had I reached the Spot,
              When round my wrist I felt a cord drawn tight,
              As if the blind Man's dog were pulling at it.


OSWALD        But after that?


MARMADUKE                     The features of Idonea
              Lurked in his face--

OSWALD                             Psha! Never to these eyes
              Will retribution show itself again
              With aspect so inviting. Why forbid me
              To share your triumph?


MARMADUKE                            Yes, her very look,
              Smiling in sleep--


OSWALD                          A pretty feat of Fancy!


MARMADUKE     Though but a glimpse, it sent me to my prayers.


OSWALD        Is he alive?


MARMADUKE                  What mean you? who alive?


OSWALD        Herbert! since you will have it, Baron Herbert;
              He who will gain his Seignory when Idonea
              Hath become Clifford's harlot--is _he_ living?


MARMADUKE     The old Man in that dungeon _is_ alive.


OSWALD        Henceforth, then, will I never in camp or field
              Obey you more. Your weakness, to the Band,
              Shall be proclaimed: brave Men, they all shall hear it.
              You a protector of humanity!
              Avenger you of outraged innocence!


MARMADUKE     'Twas dark--dark as the grave; yet did I see,
              Saw him--his face turned toward me; and I tell thee
              Idonea's filial countenance was there
              To baffle me--it put me to my prayers.
              Upwards I cast my eyes, and, through a crevice,
              Beheld a star twinkling above my head,
              And, by the living God, I could not do it.
       [Sinks exhausted.]


OSWALD (to himself)
              Now may I perish if this turn do more
              Than make me change my course.
       (To MARMADUKE.)                       Dear Marmaduke,
              My words were rashly spoken; I recal them:
              I feel my error; shedding human blood
              Is a most serious thing.


MARMADUKE                               Not I alone,
              Thou too art deep in guilt.


OSWALD                                    We have indeed
              Been most presumptuous. There _is_ guilt in this,
              Else could so strong a mind have ever known
              These trepidations? Plain it is that Heaven
              Has marked out this foul Wretch as one whose crimes
              Must never come before a mortal judgment-seat,
              Or be chastised by mortal instruments.


MARMADUKE
              A thought that's worth a thousand worlds!

    [Goes towards the dungeon.]


OSWALD                                                  I grieve
              That, in my zeal, I have caused you so much pain.


MARMADUKE      Think not of that! 'tis over--we are safe.


OSWALD (as if to himself, yet speaking aloud)
              The truth is hideous, but how stifle it?
     [Turning to MARMADUKE.]
              Give me your sword--nay, here are stones and fragments,
              The least of which would beat out a man's brains;
              Or you might drive your head against that wall.
              No! this is not the place to hear the tale:
              It should be told you pinioned in your bed,
              Or on some vast and solitary plain
              Blown to you from a trumpet.


MARMADUKE                                  Why talk thus?
              Whate'er the monster brooding in your breast
              I care not: fear I have none, and cannot fear--
         [The sound of a horn is heard.]
              That horn again--'Tis some one of our Troop;
              What do they here? Listen!


OSWALD                                  What! dogged like thieves!


[Enter WALLACE and LACY, etc.]


LACY          You are found at last, thanks to the vagrant Troop
              For not misleading us.


OSWALD (looking at WALLACE)
                                     That subtle Greybeard--
              I'd rather see my father's ghost.


LACY (to MARMADUKE)
                                                My Captain,
              We come by order of the Band. Belike
              You have not heard that Henry has at last
              Dissolved the Barons' League, and sent abroad
              His Sheriffs with fit force to reinstate
              The genuine owners of such Lands and Baronies
              As, in these long commotions, have been seized.
              His Power is this way tending. It befits us
              To stand upon our guard, and with our swords
              Defend the innocent.


MARMADUKE                             Lacy! we look
              But at the surfaces of things; we hear
              Of towns in flames, fields ravaged, young and old
              Driven out in troops to want and nakedness;
              Then grasp our swords and rush upon a cure
              That flatters us, because it asks not thought:
              The deeper malady is better hid;
              The world is poisoned at the heart.


LACY                                              What mean you?


WALLACE (whose eye has been fixed suspiciously upon OSWALD)
              Ay, what is it you mean?


MARMADUKE                             Hark'ee, my Friends;--
    [Appearing gay.]
              Were there a Man who, being weak and helpless
              And most forlorn, should bribe a Mother, pressed
              By penury, to yield him up her Daughter,
              A little Infant, and instruct the Babe,
              Prattling upon his knee, to call him Father--


LACY          Why, if his heart be tender, that offence
              I could forgive him.


MARMADUKE (going on)
                                   And should he make the Child
              An instrument of falsehood, should he teach her
              To stretch her arms, and dim the gladsome light
              Of infant playfulness with piteous looks
              Of misery that was not--

LACY
                                       Troth, 'tis hard--
              But in a world like ours--


MARMADUKE (changing his tone)
                                         This self-same Man--
              Even while he printed kisses on the cheek
              Of this poor Babe, and taught its innocent tongue
              To lisp the name of Father--could he look
              To the unnatural harvest of that time
              When he should give her up, a Woman grown,
              To him who bid the highest in the market
              Of foul pollution--


LACY                               The whole visible world
              Contains not such a Monster!


MARMADUKE                                   For this purpose
              Should he resolve to taint her Soul by means
              Which bathe the limbs in sweat to think of them;
              Should he, by tales which would draw tears from iron,
              Work on her nature, and so turn compassion
              And gratitude to ministers of vice,
              And make the spotless spirit of filial love
              Prime mover in a plot to damn his Victim
              Both soul and body--


WALLACE                           'Tis too horrible;
              Oswald, what say you to it?


LACY                                      Hew him down,
              And fling him to the ravens.


MARMADUKE                                  But his aspect
              It is so meek, his countenance so venerable.


WALLACE (with an appearance of mistrust)
              But how, what say you, Oswald?


LACY (at the same moment)
                                              Stab him, were it
              Before the Altar.


MARMADUKE                       What, if he were sick,
              Tottering upon the very verge of life,
              And old, and blind--


LACY                                Blind, say you?


OSWALD (coming forward)
                                                    Are we Men,
              Or own we baby Spirits? Genuine courage
              Is not an accidental quality,
              A thing dependent for its casual birth
              On opposition and impediment.
              Wisdom, if Justice speak the word, beats down
              The giant's strength; and, at the voice of Justice,
              Spares not the worm. The giant and the worm--
              She weighs them in one scale. The wiles of woman,
              And craft of age, seducing reason, first
              Made weakness a protection, and obscured
              The moral shapes of things. His tender cries
              And helpless innocence--do they protect
              The infant lamb? and shall the infirmities,
              Which have enabled this enormous Culprit
              To perpetrate his crimes, serve as a Sanctuary
              To cover him from punishment? Shame!--Justice,
              Admitting no resistance, bends alike
              The feeble and the strong. She needs not here
              Her bonds and chains, which make the mighty feeble.
             --We recognise in this old Man a victim
              Prepared already for the sacrifice.


LACY          By heaven, his words are reason!


OSWALD                                         Yes, my Friends,
              His countenance is meek and venerable;
              And, by the Mass, to see him at his prayers!--
              I am of flesh and blood, and may I perish
              When my heart does not ache to think of it!--
              Poor Victim! not a virtue under heaven
              But what was made an engine to ensnare thee;
              But yet I trust, Idonea, thou art safe.


LACY          Idonea!


WALLACE               How! What? your Idonea?
          [To MARMADUKE.]


MARMADUKE                                      _Mine;_
              But now no longer mine. You know Lord Clifford;
              He is the Man to whom the Maiden--pure
              As beautiful, and gentle and benign,
              And in her ample heart loving even me--
              Was to be yielded up.


LACY                               Now, by the head
              Of my own child, this Man must die; my hand,
              A worthier wanting, shall itself entwine
              In his grey hairs!--


MARMADUKE (to LACY)
                                   I love the Father in thee.
              You know me, Friends; I have a heart to feel,
              And I have felt, more than perhaps becomes me
              Or duty sanctions.


LACY                             We will have ample justice.
              Who are we, Friends? Do we not live on ground
              Where Souls are self-defended, free to grow
              Like mountain oaks rocked by the stormy wind?
              Mark the Almighty Wisdom, which decreed
              This monstrous crime to be laid open--_here,_
              Where Reason has an eye that she can use,
              And Men alone are Umpires. To the Camp
              He shall be led, and there, the Country round
              All gathered to the spot, in open day
              Shall Nature be avenged.


OSWALD                                'Tis nobly thought;
              His death will be a monument for ages.


MARMADUKE (to LACY)
              I thank you for that hint. He shall be brought
              Before the Camp, and would that best and wisest
              Of every country might be present. There,
              His crime shall be proclaimed; and for the rest
              It shall be done as Wisdom shall decide:
              Meanwhile, do you two hasten back and see
              That all is well prepared.


WALLACE                                  We will obey you.
     (Aside.) But softly! we must look a little nearer.


MARMADUKE     Tell where you found us. At some future time
              I will explain the cause.


[Exeunt.]




ACT III


SCENE--The door of the Hostel, a group of Pilgrims as before; IDONEA and
the Host among them


HOST          Lady, you'll find your Father at the Convent
              As I have told you: He left us yesterday
              With two Companions; one of them, as seemed,
              His most familiar Friend.
     (Going.)                          There was a letter
              Of which I heard them speak, but that I fancy
              Has been forgotten.


IDONEA (to Host)
              Farewell!


HOST
                                  Gentle pilgrims,
              St. Cuthbert speed you on your holy errand.


[Exeunt IDONEA and Pilgrims.]


[SCENE--A desolate Moor]


[OSWALD (alone)]


OSWALD        Carry him to the Camp! Yes, to the Camp.
              Oh, Wisdom! a most wise resolve! and then,
              That half a word should blow it to the winds!
              This last device must end my work.--Methinks
              It were a pleasant pastime to construct
              A scale and table of belief--as thus--
              Two columns, one for passion, one for proof;
              Each rises as the other falls: and first,
              Passion a unit and _against_ us--proof--
              Nay, we must travel in another path,
              Or we're stuck fast for ever;--passion, then,
              Shall be a unit _for_ us; proof--no, passion!
              We'll not insult thy majesty by time,
              Person, and place--the where, the when, the how,
              And all particulars that dull brains require
              To constitute the spiritless shape of Fact,
              They bow to, calling the idol, Demonstration.
              A whipping to the Moralists who preach
              That misery is a sacred thing: for me,
              I know no cheaper engine to degrade a man,
              Nor any half so sure. This Stripling's mind
              Is shaken till the dregs float on the surface;
              And, in the storm and anguish of the heart,
              He talks of a transition in his Soul,
              And dreams that he is happy. We dissect
              The senseless body, and why not the mind?--
              These are strange sights--the mind of man, upturned,
              Is in all natures a strange spectacle;
              In some a hideous one--hem! shall I stop?
              No.--Thoughts and feelings will sink deep, but then
              They have no substance. Pass but a few minutes,
              And something shall be done which Memory
              May touch, whene'er her Vassals are at work.


[Enter MARMADUKE, from behind]


OSWALD (turning to meet him)
              But listen, for my peace--


MARMADUKE
                                         Why, I _believe_ you.


OSWALD        But hear the proofs--


MARMADUKE                           Ay, prove that when two peas
              Lie snugly in a pod, the pod must then
              Be larger than the peas--prove this--'twere matter
              Worthy the hearing. Fool was I to dream
              It ever could be otherwise!


OSWALD                                   Last night
              When I returned with water from the brook,
              I overheard the Villains--every word
              Like red-hot iron burnt into my heart.
              Said one, "It is agreed on. The blind Man
              Shall feign a sudden illness, and the Girl,
              Who on her journey must proceed alone,
              Under pretence of violence, be seized.
              She is," continued the detested Slave,
              "She is right willing--strange if she were not!--
              They say, Lord Clifford is a savage man;
              But, faith, to see him in his silken tunic,
              Fitting his low voice to the minstrel's harp,
              There's witchery in't. I never knew a maid
              That could withstand it. True," continued he,
              "When we arranged the affair, she wept a little
              (Not the less welcome to my Lord for that)
              And said, 'My Father he will have it so.'"


MARMADUKE     I am your hearer.

OSWALD                         This I caught, and more
              That may not be retold to any ear.
              The obstinate bolt of a small iron door
              Detained them near the gateway of the Castle.
              By a dim lantern's light I saw that wreaths
              Of flowers were in their hands, as if designed
              For festive decoration; and they said,
              With brutal laughter and most foul allusion,
              That they should share the banquet with their Lord
              And his new Favorite.


MARMADUKE
                                    Misery!--

OSWALD                                         I knew
              How you would be disturbed by this dire news,
              And therefore chose this solitary Moor,
              Here to impart the tale, of which, last night,
              I strove to ease my mind, when our two Comrades,
              Commissioned by the Band, burst in upon us.


MARMADUKE     Last night, when moved to lift the avenging steel,
              I did believe all things were shadows--yea,
              Living or dead all things were bodiless,
              Or but the mutual mockeries of body,
              Till that same star summoned me back again.
              Now I could laugh till my ribs ached.    Fool!
              To let a creed, built in the heart of things,
              Dissolve before a twinkling atom!--Oswald,
              I could fetch lessons out of wiser schools
              Than you have entered, were it worth the pains.
              Young as I am, I might go forth a teacher,
              And you should see how deeply I could reason
              Of love in all its shapes, beginnings, ends;
              Of moral qualities in their diverse aspects;
              Of actions, and their laws and tendencies.


OSWALD        You take it as it merits--


MARMADUKE                                 One a King,
              General or Cham, Sultan or Emperor,
              Strews twenty acres of good meadow-ground
              With carcases, in lineament and shape
              And substance, nothing differing from his own,
              But that they cannot stand up of themselves;
              Another sits i' th' sun, and by the hour
              Floats kingcups in the brook--a Hero one
              We call, and scorn the other as Time's spendthrift;
              But have they not a world of common ground
              To occupy--both fools, or wise alike,
              Each in his way?


OSWALD                         Troth, I begin to think so.


MARMADUKE     Now for the corner-stone of my philosophy:
              I would not give a denier for the man
              Who, on such provocation as this earth
              Yields, could not chuck his babe beneath the chin,
              And send it with a fillip to its grave.


OSWALD        Nay, you leave me behind.


MARMADUKE                              That such a One,
              So pious in demeanour! in his look
              So saintly and so pure!--Hark'ee, my Friend,
              I'll plant myself before Lord Clifford's Castle,
              A surly mastiff kennels at the gate,
              And he shall howl and I will laugh, a medley
              Most tunable.

OSWALD                     In faith, a pleasant scheme;
              But take your sword along with you, for that
              Might in such neighbourhood find seemly use.--
              But first, how wash our hands of this old Man?


MARMADUKE     Oh yes, that mole, that viper in the path;
              Plague on my memory, him I had forgotten.


OSWALD        You know we left him sitting--see him yonder.


MARMADUKE     Ha! ha!--


OSWALD                   As 'twill be but a moment's work,
              I will stroll on; you follow when 'tis done.


[Exeunt.]


SCENE changes to another part of the Moor at a short distance--HERBERT
is discovered seated on a stone


HERBERT       A sound of laughter, too!--'tis well--I feared,
              The Stranger had some pitiable sorrow
              Pressing upon his solitary heart.
              Hush!--'tis the feeble and earth-loving wind
              That creeps along the bells of the crisp heather.
              Alas! 'tis cold--I shiver in the sunshine--
              What can this mean? There is a psalm that speaks
              Of God's parental mercies--with Idonea
              I used to sing it.--Listen!--what foot is there?


[Enter MARMADUKE]


MARMADUKE (aside--looking at HERBERT)
              And I have loved this Man! and _she_ hath loved him!
              And I loved her, and she loves the Lord Clifford!
              And there it ends;--if this be not enough
              To make mankind merry for evermore,
              Then plain it is as day, that eyes were made
              For a wise purpose--verily to weep with!
     [Looking round.]
              A pretty prospect this, a masterpiece
              Of Nature, finished with most curious skill!
(To HERBERT.) Good Baron, have you ever practised tillage?
              Pray tell me what this land is worth by the acre?


HERBERT       How glad I am to hear your voice! I know not
              Wherein I have offended you;--last night
              I found in you the kindest of Protectors;
              This morning, when I spoke of weariness,
              You from my shoulder took my scrip and threw it
              About your own; but for these two hours past
              Once only have you spoken, when the lark
              Whirred from among the fern beneath our feet,
              And I, no coward in my better days,
              Was almost terrified.


MARMADUKE                          That's excellent!--
              So, you bethought you of the many ways
              In which a man may come to his end, whose crimes
              Have roused all Nature up against him--pshaw!--


HERBERT       For mercy's sake, is nobody in sight?
              No traveller, peasant, herdsman?


MARMADUKE                                     Not a soul:
              Here is a tree, ragged, and bent, and bare,
              That turns its goat's-beard flakes of pea-green moss
              From the stern breathing of the rough sea-wind;
              This have we, but no other company:
              Commend me to the place. If a man should die
              And leave his body here, it were all one
              As he were twenty fathoms underground.


HERBERT       Where is our common Friend?


MARMADUKE                                 A ghost, methinks--
              The Spirit of a murdered man, for instance--
              Might have fine room to ramble about here,
              A grand domain to squeak and gibber in.


HERBERT       Lost Man! if thou have any close-pent guilt
              Pressing upon thy heart, and this the hour
              Of visitation--


MARMADUKE                     A bold word from _you_!


HERBERT       Restore him, Heaven!


MARMADUKE                        The desperate Wretch!--A Flower,
              Fairest of all flowers, was she once, but now
              They have snapped her from the stem--Poh! let her lie
              Besoiled with mire, and let the houseless snail
              Feed on her leaves. You knew her well--ay, there,
              Old Man! you were a very Lynx, you knew
              The worm was in her--


HERBERT                            Mercy! Sir, what mean you?


MARMADUKE     You have a Daughter!


HERBERT                             Oh that she were here!--
              She hath an eye that sinks into all hearts,
              And if I have in aught offended you,
              Soon would her gentle voice make peace between us.


MARMADUKE (aside)
              I do believe he weeps--I could weep too--
              There is a vein of her voice that runs through his:
              Even such a Man my fancy bodied forth
              From the first moment that I loved the Maid;
              And for his sake I loved her more: these tears--
              I did not think that aught was left in me
              Of what I have been--yes, I thank thee, Heaven!
              One happy thought has passed across my mind.
             --It may not be--I am cut off from man;
              No more shall I be man--no more shall I
              Have human feelings!--
          (To HERBERT)             --Now, for a little more
              About your Daughter!


HERBERT                            Troops of armed men,
              Met in the roads, would bless us; little children,
              Rushing along in the full tide of play,
              Stood silent as we passed them! I have heard
              The boisterous carman, in the miry road,
              Check his loud whip and hail us with mild voice,
              And speak with milder voice to his poor beasts.


MARMADUKE     And whither were you going?


HERBERT                                  Learn, young Man,--
              To fear the virtuous, and reverence misery,
              Whether too much for patience, or, like mine,
              Softened till it becomes a gift of mercy.


MARMADUKE     Now, this is as it should be!


HERBERT                                     I am weak!--
              My Daughter does not know how weak I am;
              And, as thou see'st, under the arch of heaven
              Here do I stand, alone, to helplessness,
              By the good God, our common Father, doomed!--
              But I had once a spirit and an arm--


MARMADUKE     Now, for a word about your Barony:
              I fancy when you left the Holy Land,
              And came to--what's your title--eh? your claims
              Were undisputed!

HERBERT                        Like a mendicant,
              Whom no one comes to meet, I stood alone;--
              I murmured--but, remembering Him who feeds
              The pelican and ostrich of the desert,
              From my own threshold I looked up to Heaven
              And did not want glimmerings of quiet hope.
              So, from the court I passed, and down the brook,
              Led by its murmur, to the ancient oak
              I came; and when I felt its cooling shade,
              I sate me down, and cannot but believe--
              While in my lap I held my little Babe
              And clasped her to my heart, my heart that ached
              More with delight than grief--I heard a voice
              Such as by Cherith on Elijah called;
              It said, "I will be with thee." A little boy,
              A shepherd-lad, ere yet my trance was gone,
              Hailed us as if he had been sent from heaven,
              And said, with tears, that he would be our guide:
              I had a better guide--that innocent Babe--
              Her, who hath saved me, to this hour, from harm,
              From cold, from hunger, penury, and death;
              To whom I owe the best of all the good
              I have, or wish for, upon earth--and more
              And higher far than lies within earth's bounds:
              Therefore I bless her: when I think of Man,
              I bless her with sad spirit,--when of God,
              I bless her in the fulness of my joy!


MARMADUKE     The name of daughter in his mouth, he prays!
              With nerves so steady, that the very flies
              Sit unmolested on his staff.--Innocent!--
              If he were innocent--then he would tremble
              And be disturbed, as I am.
     (Turning aside.)                    I have read
              In Story, what men now alive have witnessed,
              How, when the People's mind was racked with doubt,
              Appeal was made to the great Judge: the Accused
              With naked feet walked over burning ploughshares.
              Here is a Man by Nature's hand prepared
              For a like trial, but more merciful.
              Why else have I been led to this bleak Waste?
              Bare is it, without house or track, and destitute
              Of obvious shelter, as a shipless sea.
              Here will I leave him--here--All-seeing God!
              Such as _he_ is, and sore perplexed as I am,
              I will commit him to this final _Ordeal!_--
              He heard a voice--a shepherd-lad came to him
              And was his guide; if once, why not again,
              And in this desert? If never--then the whole
              Of what he says, and looks, and does, and is,
              Makes up one damning falsehood. Leave him here
              To cold and hunger!--Pain is of the heart,
              And what are a few throes of bodily suffering
              If they can waken one pang of remorse?
        [Goes up to HERBERT.]
              Old Man! my wrath is as a flame burnt out,
              It cannot be rekindled. Thou art here
              Led by my hand to save thee from perdition:
              Thou wilt have time to breathe and think--


HERBERT       Oh, Mercy!


MARMADUKE     I know the need that all men have of mercy,
              And therefore leave thee to a righteous judgment.


HERBERT        My Child, my blessed Child!

MARMADUKE      No more of that;
              Thou wilt have many guides if thou art innocent;
              Yea, from the utmost corners of the earth,
              That Woman will come o'er this Waste to save thee.
          [He pauses and looks at HERBERT'S staff.]
              Ha! what is here? and carved by her own hand!
       [Reads upon the staff.]
              "I am eyes to the blind, saith the Lord.
              He that puts his trust in me shall not fail!"
              Yes, be it so;--repent and be forgiven--
              God and that staff are now thy only guides.
          [He leaves HERBERT on the Moor.]




SCENE--An eminence, a Beacon on the summit

LACY, WALLACE, LENNOX, etc. etc.


SEVERAL OF THE BAND (confusedly)     But patience!


ONE OF THE BAND                   Curses on that Traitor, Oswald!--
                          Our Captain made a prey to foul device!--


LENNOX (to WALLACE)
              His tool, the wandering Beggar, made last night
              A plain confession, such as leaves no doubt,
              Knowing what otherwise we know too well,
              That she revealed the truth. Stand by me now;
              For rather would I have a nest of vipers
              Between my breast-plate and my skin, than make
              Oswald my special enemy, if you
              Deny me your support.


LACY                                 We have been fooled--
              But for the motive?


WALLACE                           Natures such as his
              Spin motives out of their own bowels, Lacy!
              I learn'd this when I was a Confessor.
              I know him well; there needs no other motive
              Than that most strange incontinence in crime
              Which haunts this Oswald. Power is life to him
              And breath and being; where he cannot govern,
              He will destroy.


LACY                          To have been trapped like moles!--
              Yes, you are right, we need not hunt for motives:
              There is no crime from which this man would shrink;
              He recks not human law; and I have noticed
              That often when the name of God is uttered,
              A sudden blankness overspreads his face.


LENNOX        Yet, reasoner as he is, his pride has built
              Some uncouth superstition of its own.


WALLACE       I have seen traces of it.


LENNOX        Once he headed
              A band of Pirates in the Norway seas;
              And when the King of Denmark summoned him
              To the oath of fealty, I well remember,
              'Twas a strange answer that he made; he said,
              "I hold of Spirits, and the Sun in heaven."


LACY
               He is no madman.

WALLACE
                                 A most subtle doctor
              Were that man, who could draw the line that parts
              Pride and her daughter, Cruelty, from Madness,
              That should be scourged, not pitied. Restless Minds,
              Such Minds as find amid their fellow-men
              No heart that loves them, none that they can love,
              Will turn perforce and seek for sympathy
              In dim relation to imagined Beings.


ONE OF THE BAND
              What if he mean to offer up our Captain
              An expiation and a sacrifice
              To those infernal fiends!


WALLACE                                 Now, if the event
              Should be as Lennox has foretold, then swear,
              My Friends, his heart shall have as many wounds
              As there are daggers here.


LACY                                     What need of swearing!


ONE OF THE BAND       Let us away!


ANOTHER                              Away!


A THIRD                                    Hark! how the horns
              Of those Scotch Rovers echo through the vale.


LACY          Stay you behind; and when the sun is down,
              Light up this beacon.

ONE OF THE BAND                       You shall be obeyed.


    [They go out together.]



SCENE--The Wood on the edge of the Moor.

MARMADUKE (alone)


MARMADUKE     Deep, deep and vast, vast beyond human thought,
              Yet calm.--I could believe, that there was here
              The only quiet heart on earth. In terror,
              Remembered terror, there is peace and rest.


[Enter OSWALD]


OSWALD        Ha! my dear Captain.



MARMADUKE                             A later meeting, Oswald,
              Would have been better timed.


OSWALD                                     Alone, I see;
              You have done your duty. I had hopes, which now
              I feel that you will justify.


MARMADUKE                                    I had fears,
              From which I have freed myself--but 'tis my wish
              To be alone, and therefore we must part.


OSWALD        Nay, then--I am mistaken. There's a weakness
              About you still; you talk of solitude--
              I am your friend.


MARMADUKE                       What need of this assurance
              At any time? and why given now?


OSWALD                                         Because
              You are now in truth my Master; you have taught me
              What there is not another living man
              Had strength to teach;--and therefore gratitude
              Is bold, and would relieve itself by praise.


MARMADUKE     Wherefore press this on me?

OSWALD                                     Because I feel
              That you have shown, and by a signal instance,
              How they who would be just must seek the rule
              By diving for it into their own bosoms.
              To-day you have thrown off a tyranny
              That lives but in the torpid acquiescence
              Of our emasculated souls, the tyranny
              Of the world's masters, with the musty rules
              By which they uphold their craft from age to age:
              You have obeyed the only law that sense
              Submits to recognise; the immediate law,
              From the clear light of circumstances, flashed
              Upon an independent Intellect.
              Henceforth new prospects open on your path;
              Your faculties should grow with the demand;
              I still will be your friend, will cleave to you
              Through good and evil, obloquy and scorn,
              Oft as they dare to follow on your steps.


MARMADUKE     I would be left alone.


OSWALD (exultingly)
                                      I know your motives!
              I am not of the world's presumptuous judges,
              Who damn where they can neither see nor feel,
              With a hard-hearted ignorance; your struggles
              I witness'd, and now hail your victory.


MARMADUKE     Spare me awhile that greeting.


OSWALD                                        It may be,
              That some there are, squeamish half-thinking cowards,
              Who will turn pale upon you, call you murderer,
              And you will walk in solitude among them.
              A mighty evil for a strong-built mind!--
              Join twenty tapers of unequal height
              And light them joined, and you will see the less
              How 'twill burn down the taller; and they all
              Shall prey upon the tallest. Solitude!--
              The Eagle lives in Solitude!


MARMADUKE                                   Even so,
              The Sparrow so on the house-top, and I,
              The weakest of God's creatures, stand resolved
              To abide the issue of my act, alone.


OSWALD        _Now_ would you? and for ever?--My young Friend,
              As time advances either we become
              The prey or masters of our own past deeds.
              Fellowship we _must_ have, willing or no;
              And if good Angels fail, slack in their duty,
              Substitutes, turn our faces where we may,
              Are still forthcoming; some which, though they bear
              Ill names, can render no ill services,
              In recompense for what themselves required.
              So meet extremes in this mysterious world,
              And opposites thus melt into each other.


MARMADUKE     Time, since Man first drew breath, has never moved
              With such a weight upon his wings as now;
              But they will soon be lightened.


OSWALD                                         Ay, look up--
              Cast round you your mind's eye, and you will learn
              Fortitude is the child of Enterprise:
              Great actions move our admiration, chiefly
              Because they carry in themselves an earnest
              That we can suffer greatly.


MARMADUKE                                  Very true.


OSWALD        Action is transitory--a step, a blow,
              The motion of a muscle--this way or that--
              'Tis done, and in the after-vacancy
              We wonder at ourselves like men betrayed:
              Suffering is permanent, obscure and dark,
              And shares the nature of infinity.


MARMADUKE     Truth--and I feel it.


OSWALD                              What! if you had bid
              Eternal farewell to unmingled joy
              And the light dancing of the thoughtless heart;
              It is the toy of fools, and little fit
              For such a world as this. The wise abjure
              All thoughts whose idle composition lives
              In the entire forgetfulness of pain.
             --I see I have disturbed you.


MARMADUKE                                   By no means.


OSWALD        Compassion!--pity!--pride can do without them;
              And what if you should never know them more!--
              He is a puny soul who, feeling pain,
              Finds ease because another feels it too.
              If e'er I open out this heart of mine
              It shall be for a nobler end--to teach
              And not to purchase puling sympathy.
             --Nay, you are pale.


MARMADUKE
                        It may be so.


OSWALD                                        Remorse--
              It cannot live with thought; think on, think on,
              And it will die. What! in this universe,
              Where the least things control the greatest, where
              The faintest breath that breathes can move a world;
              What! feel remorse, where, if a cat had sneezed,
              A leaf had fallen, the thing had never been
              Whose very shadow gnaws us to the vitals.


MARMADUKE     Now, whither are you wandering? That a man
              So used to suit his language to the time,
              Should thus so widely differ from himself--
              It is most strange.


OSWALD                            Murder!--what's in the word!--
              I have no cases by me ready made
              To fit all deeds. Carry him to the Camp!--
              A shallow project;--you of late have seen
              More deeply, taught us that the institutes
              Of Nature, by a cunning usurpation
              Banished from human intercourse, exist
              Only in our relations to the brutes
              That make the fields their dwelling. If a snake
              Crawl from beneath our feet we do not ask
              A license to destroy him: our good governors
              Hedge in the life of every pest and plague
              That bears the shape of man; and for what purpose,
              But to protect themselves from extirpation?--
              This flimsy barrier you have overleaped.


MARMADUKE     My Office is fulfilled--the Man is now
              Delivered to the Judge of all things.


OSWALD
                                      Dead!

MARMADUKE     I have borne my burthen to its destined end.


OSWALD         This instant we'll return to our Companions--
               Oh how I long to see their faces again!


[Enter IDONEA with Pilgrims who continue their journey.]


IDONEA (after some time)
              What, Marmaduke! now thou art mine for ever.
              And Oswald, too!
          (To MARMADUKE.)      On will we to my Father
              With the glad tidings which this day hath brought;
              We'll go together, and, such proof received
              Of his own rights restored, his gratitude
              To God above will make him feel for ours.


OSWALD        I interrupt you?


IDONEA                         Think not so.


MARMADUKE                                    Idonea,
              That I should ever live to see this moment!


IDONEA        Forgive me.--Oswald knows it all--he knows,
              Each word of that unhappy letter fell
              As a blood drop from my heart.


OSWALD                                      'Twas even so.


MARMADUKE     I have much to say, but for whose ear?--not thine.


IDONEA        Ill can I bear that look--Plead for me, Oswald!
              You are my Father's Friend.
          (To MARMADUKE.)                Alas, you know not,
              And never _can_ you know, how much he loved me.
              Twice had he been to me a father, twice
              Had given me breath, and was I not to be
              His daughter, once his daughter? could I withstand
              His pleading face, and feel his clasping arms,
              And hear his prayer that I would not forsake him
              In his old age--
       [Hides her face.]


MARMADUKE     Patience--Heaven grant me patience!--
              She weeps, she weeps--_my_ brain shall burn for hours
              Ere _I_ can shed a tear.


IDONEA                                 I was a woman;
              And, balancing the hopes that are the dearest
              To womankind with duty to my Father,
              I yielded up those precious hopes, which nought
              On earth could else have wrested from me;--if erring,
              Oh let me be forgiven!


MARMADUKE                            I _do_ forgive thee.


IDONEA        But take me to your arms--this breast, alas!
              It throbs, and you have a heart that does not feel it.


MARMADUKE (exultingly)
              She is innocent.    [He embraces her.]


OSWALD (aside)
              Were I a Moralist,
              I should make wondrous revolution here;
              It were a quaint experiment to show
              The beauty of truth--   [Addressing them.]
                  I see I interrupt you;
              I shall have business with you, Marmaduke;
              Follow me to the Hostel.

        [Exit OSWALD.]


IDONEA                                  Marmaduke,
              This is a happy day. My Father soon
              Shall sun himself before his native doors;
              The lame, the hungry, will be welcome there.
              No more shall he complain of wasted strength,
              Of thoughts that fail, and a decaying heart;
              His good works will be balm and life to him.


MARMADUKE     This is most strange!--I know not what it was,
              But there was something which most plainly said,
              That thou wert innocent.


IDONEA                                 How innocent!--
              Oh heavens! you've been deceived.


MARMADUKE                                      Thou art a Woman
              To bring perdition on the universe.


IDONEA        Already I've been punished to the height
              Of my offence.
    [Smiling affectionately.]
                  I see you love me still,
              The labours of my hand are still your joy;
              Bethink you of the hour when on your shoulder
              I hung this belt.
    [Pointing to the belt on which was suspended HERBERT'S scrip.]


MARMADUKE     Mercy of Heaven!    [Sinks.]


IDONEA                        What ails you?    [Distractedly.]


MARMADUKE     The scrip that held his food, and I forgot
              To give it back again!


IDONEA                               What mean your words?


MARMADUKE     I know not what I said--all may be well.


IDONEA         That smile hath life in it!


MARMADUKE                                  This road is perilous;
              I will attend you to a Hut that stands
              Near the wood's edge--rest there to-night, I pray you:
              For me, I have business, as you heard, with Oswald,
              But will return to you by break of day.


[Exeunt.]




ACT IV

SCENE--A desolate prospect--a ridge of rocks--a Chapel on the summit of
one--Moon behind the rocks--night stormy--irregular sound of a
bell--HERBERT enters exhausted.


HERBERT       That Chapel-bell in mercy seemed to guide me,
              But now it mocks my steps; its fitful stroke
              Can scarcely be the work of human hands.
              Hear me, ye Men, upon the cliffs, if such
              There be who pray nightly before the Altar.
              Oh that I had but strength to reach the place!
              My Child--my Child--dark--dark--I faint--this wind--
              These stifling blasts--God help me!


[Enter ELDRED.]


ELDRED                                       Better this bare rock,
              Though it were tottering over a man's head,
              Than a tight case of dungeon walls for shelter
              From such rough dealing.
   [A moaning voice is heard.]
                                       Ha! what sound is that?
              Trees creaking in the wind (but none are here)
              Send forth such noises--and that weary bell!
              Surely some evil Spirit abroad to-night
              Is ringing it--'twould stop a Saint in prayer,
              And that--what is it? never was sound so like
              A human groan. Ha! what is here? Poor Man--
              Murdered! alas! speak--speak, I am your friend:
              No answer--hush--lost wretch, he lifts his hand
              And lays it to his heart--
      (Kneels to him.)                   I pray you speak!
              What has befallen you?


HERBERT (feebly)
                                     A stranger has done this,
              And in the arms of a stranger I must die.

ELDRED        Nay, think not so: come, let me raise you up:
      [Raises him.]
              This is a dismal place--well--that is well--
              I was too fearful--take me for your guide
              And your support--my hut is not far off.
       [Draws him gently off the stage.]



SCENE--A room in the Hostel--MARMADUKE and OSWALD


MARMADUKE     But for Idonea!--I have cause to think
              That she is innocent.


OSWALD                            Leave that thought awhile,
              As one of those beliefs which in their hearts
              Lovers lock up as pearls, though oft no better
              Than feathers clinging to their points of passion.
              This day's event has laid on me the duty
              Of opening out my story; you must hear it,
              And without further preface.--In my youth,
              Except for that abatement which is paid
              By envy as a tribute to desert,
              I was the pleasure of all hearts, the darling
              Of every tongue--as you are now. You've heard
              That I embarked for Syria. On our voyage
              Was hatched among the crew a foul Conspiracy
              Against my honour, in the which our Captain
              Was, I believed, prime Agent. The wind fell;
              We lay becalmed week after week, until
              The water of the vessel was exhausted;
              I felt a double fever in my veins,
              Yet rage suppressed itself;--to a deep stillness
              Did my pride tame my pride;--for many days,
              On a dead sea under a burning sky,
              I brooded o'er my injuries, deserted
              By man and nature;--if a breeze had blown,
              It might have found its way into my heart,
              And I had been--no matter--do you mark me?


MARMADUKE     Quick--to the point--if any untold crime
              Doth haunt your memory.


OSWALD                                Patience, hear me further!--
              One day in silence did we drift at noon
              By a bare rock, narrow, and white, and bare;
              No food was there, no drink, no grass, no shade,
              No tree, nor jutting eminence, nor form
              Inanimate large as the body of man,
              Nor any living thing whose lot of life
              Might stretch beyond the measure of one moon.
              To dig for water on the spot, the Captain
              Landed with a small troop, myself being one:
              There I reproached him with his treachery.
              Imperious at all times, his temper rose;
              He struck me; and that instant had I killed him,
              And put an end to his insolence, but my Comrades
              Rushed in between us: then did I insist
              (All hated him, and I was stung to madness)
              That we should leave him there, alive!--we did so.


MARMADUKE     And he was famished?


OSWALD                              Naked was the spot;
              Methinks I see it now--how in the sun
              Its stony surface glittered like a shield;
              And in that miserable place we left him,
              Alone but for a swarm of minute creatures
              Not one of which could help him while alive,
              Or mourn him dead.


MARMADUKE                        A man by men cast off,
              Left without burial! nay, not dead nor dying,
              But standing, walking, stretching forth his arms,
              In all things like ourselves, but in the agony
              With which he called for mercy; and--even so--
              He was forsaken?


OSWALD                             There is a power in sounds:
              The cries he uttered might have stopped the boat
              That bore us through the water--


MARMADUKE                                      You returned
              Upon that dismal hearing--did you not?


OSWALD        Some scoffed at him with hellish mockery,
              And laughed so loud it seemed that the smooth sea
              Did from some distant region echo us.


MARMADUKE     We all are of one blood, our veins are filled
              At the same poisonous fountain!


OSWALD                                      'Twas an island
              Only by sufferance of the winds and waves,
              Which with their foam could cover it at will.
              I know not how he perished; but the calm,
              The same dead calm, continued many days.


MARMADUKE
              But his own crime had brought on him this doom,
              His wickedness prepared it; these expedients
              Are terrible, yet ours is not the fault.


OSWALD        The man was famished, and was innocent!


MARMADUKE      Impossible!


OSWALD                       The man had never wronged me.


MARMADUKE     Banish the thought, crush it, and be at peace.
              His guilt was marked--these things could never be
              Were there not eyes that see, and for good ends,
              Where ours are baffled.


OSWALD                                 I had been deceived.


MARMADUKE     And from that hour the miserable man
              No more was heard of?


OSWALD                              I had been betrayed.


MARMADUKE     And he found no deliverance!


OSWALD                                     The Crew
              Gave me a hearty welcome; they had laid
              The plot to rid themselves, at any cost,
              Of a tyrannic Master whom they loathed.
              So we pursued our voyage: when we landed,
              The tale was spread abroad; my power at once
              Shrunk from me; plans and schemes, and lofty hopes--
              All vanished. I gave way--do you attend?


MARMADUKE     The Crew deceived you?


OSWALD                               Nay, command yourself.


MARMADUKE     It is a dismal night--how the wind howls!


OSWALD        I hid my head within a Convent, there
              Lay passive as a dormouse in mid winter.
              That was no life for me--I was o'erthrown
              But not destroyed.


MARMADUKE     The proofs--you ought to have seen
              The guilt--have touched it--felt it at your heart--
              As I have done.


OSWALD                          A fresh tide of Crusaders
              Drove by the place of my retreat: three nights
              Did constant meditation dry my blood;
              Three sleepless nights I passed in sounding on,
              Through words and things, a dim and perilous way;
              And, wheresoe'er I turned me, I beheld
              A slavery compared to which the dungeon
              And clanking chains are perfect liberty.
              You understand me--I was comforted;
              I saw that every possible shape of action
              Might lead to good--I saw it and burst forth
              Thirsting for some of those exploits that fill
              The earth for sure redemption of lost peace.
     [Marking MARMADUKE'S countenance.]
              Nay, you have had the worst. Ferocity
              Subsided in a moment, like a wind
              That drops down dead out of a sky it vexed.
              And yet I had within me evermore
              A salient spring of energy; I mounted
              From action up to action with a mind
              That never rested--without meat or drink
              Have I lived many days--my sleep was bound
              To purposes of reason--not a dream
              But had a continuity and substance
              That waking life had never power to give.


MARMADUKE     O wretched Human-kind!--Until the mystery
              Of all this world is solved, well may we envy
              The worm, that, underneath a stone whose weight
              Would crush the lion's paw with mortal anguish,
              Doth lodge, and feed, and coil, and sleep, in safety.
              Fell not the wrath of Heaven upon those traitors?


OSWALD        Give not to them a thought. From Palestine
              We marched to Syria: oft I left the Camp,
              When all that multitude of hearts was still,
              And followed on, through woods of gloomy cedar,
              Into deep chasms troubled by roaring streams;
              Or from the top of Lebanon surveyed
              The moonlight desert, and the moonlight sea:
              In these my lonely wanderings I perceived
              What mighty objects do impress their forms
              To elevate our intellectual being;
              And felt, if aught on earth deserves a curse,
              'Tis that worst principle of ill which dooms
              A thing so great to perish self-consumed.
             --So much for my remorse!


MARMADUKE                                Unhappy Man!


OSWALD        When from these forms I turned to contemplate
              The World's opinions and her usages,
              I seemed a Being who had passed alone
              Into a region of futurity,
              Whose natural element was freedom--


MARMADUKE                                           Stop--
              I may not, cannot, follow thee.


OSWALD                                          You must.
              I had been nourished by the sickly food
              Of popular applause. I now perceived
              That we are praised, only as men in us
              Do recognise some image of themselves,
              An abject counterpart of what they are,
              Or the empty thing that they would wish to be.
              I felt that merit has no surer test
              Than obloquy; that, if we wish to serve
              The world in substance, not deceive by show,
              We must become obnoxious to its hate,
              Or fear disguised in simulated scorn.


MARMADUKE     I pity, can forgive, you; but those wretches--
              That monstrous perfidy!


OSWALD                                 Keep down your wrath.
              False Shame discarded, spurious Fame despised,
              Twin sisters both of Ignorance, I found
              Life stretched before me smooth as some broad way
              Cleared for a monarch's progress. Priests might spin
              Their veil, but not for me--'twas in fit place
              Among its kindred cobwebs. I had been,
              And in that dream had left my native land,
              One of Love's simple bondsmen--the soft chain
              Was off for ever; and the men, from whom
              This liberation came, you would destroy:
              Join me in thanks for their blind services.


MARMADUKE     'Tis a strange aching that, when we would curse
              And cannot.--You have betrayed me--I have done--
              I am content--I know that he is guiltless--
              That both are guiltless, without spot or stain,
              Mutually consecrated. Poor old Man!
              And I had heart for this, because thou lovedst
              Her who from very infancy had been
              Light to thy path, warmth to thy blood!--Together
     [Turning to OSWALD.]
              We propped his steps, he leaned upon us both.


OSWALD        Ay, we are coupled by a chain of adamant;
              Let us be fellow-labourers, then, to enlarge
              Man's intellectual empire. We subsist
              In slavery; all is slavery; we receive
              Laws, but we ask not whence those laws have come;
              We need an inward sting to goad us on.


MARMADUKE     Have you betrayed me? Speak to that.


OSWALD                                             The mask,
              Which for a season I have stooped to wear,
              Must be cast off.--Know then that I was urged,
              (For other impulse let it pass) was driven,
              To seek for sympathy, because I saw
              In you a mirror of my youthful self;
              I would have made us equal once again,
              But that was a vain hope. You have struck home,
              With a few drops of blood cut short the business;
              Therein for ever you must yield to me.
              But what is done will save you from the blank
              Of living without knowledge that you live:
              Now you are suffering--for the future day,
              'Tis his who will command it.--Think of my story--
              Herbert is _innocent_.


MARMADUKE (in a faint voice, and doubtingly)
                                      You do but echo
              My own wild words?


OSWALD                           Young Man, the seed must lie
              Hid in the earth, or there can be no harvest;
              'Tis Nature's law. What I have done in darkness
              I will avow before the face of day.
              Herbert _is_ innocent.


MARMADUKE                             What fiend could prompt
              This action? Innocent!--oh, breaking heart!--
              Alive or dead, I'll find him.

         [Exit.]


OSWALD
              Alive--perdition!

         [Exit.]




SCENE--The inside of a poor Cottage

ELEANOR and IDONEA seated


IDONEA       The storm beats hard--Mercy for poor or rich,
             Whose heads are shelterless in such a night!


A VOICE WITHOUT
             Holla! to bed, good Folks, within!


ELEANOR                                          O save us!


IDONEA        What can this mean?


ELEANOR                            Alas, for my poor husband!--
              We'll have a counting of our flocks to-morrow;
              The wolf keeps festival these stormy nights:
              Be calm, sweet Lady, they are wassailers
         [The voices die away in the distance.]
              Returning from their Feast--my heart beats so--
              A noise at midnight does _so_ frighten me.


IDONEA        Hush!    [Listening.]


ELEANOR      They are gone. On such a night, my husband,
              Dragged from his bed, was cast into a dungeon,
              Where, hid from me, he counted many years,
              A criminal in no one's eyes but theirs--
              Not even in theirs--whose brutal violence
              So dealt with him.


IDONEA                              I have a noble Friend
              First among youths of knightly breeding, One
              Who lives but to protect the weak or injured.
              There again!
         [Listening.]


ELEANOR                   'Tis my husband's foot. Good Eldred
              Has a kind heart; but his imprisonment
              Has made him fearful, and he'll never be
              The man he was.


IDONEA                      I will retire;--good night!
          [She goes within.]


[Enter ELDRED (hides a bundle)]


ELDRED        Not yet in bed, Eleanor!--there are stains in that frock
                  which must be washed out.


ELEANOR       What has befallen you?


ELDRED        I am belated, and you must know the cause--
    (speaking low)
                  that is the blood of an unhappy Man.


ELEANOR       Oh! we are undone for ever.


ELDRED        Heaven forbid that I should lift my hand against any man.
                  Eleanor, I have shed tears to-night, and it comforts
                  me to think of it.


ELEANOR       Where, where is he?


ELDRED        I have done him no harm, but----it will be forgiven me; it
                  would not have been so once.


ELEANOR       You have not _buried_ anything? You are no richer than
                  when you left me?


ELDRED        Be at peace; I am innocent.


ELEANOR       Then God be thanked--

       [A short pause; she falls upon his neck.]


ELDRED        Tonight I met with an old Man lying stretched upon the
                  ground--a sad spectacle: I raised him up with a hope
                  that we might shelter and restore him.


ELEANOR (as if ready to run)
              Where is he? You were not able to bring him _all_ the way
                  with you; let us return, I can help you.


       [ELDRED shakes his head.]


ELDRED        He did not seem to wish for life: as I was struggling on,
              by the light of the moon I saw the stains of blood upon my
              clothes--he waved his hand, as if it were all useless; and
              I let him sink again to the ground.


ELEANOR       Oh that I had been by your side!


ELDRED        I tell you his hands and his body were cold--how could I
                  disturb his last moments? he strove to turn from me as
                  if he wished to settle into sleep.


ELEANOR       But, for the stains of blood--


ELDRED        He must have fallen, I fancy, for his head was cut; but I
                  think his malady was cold and hunger.


ELEANOR       Oh, Eldred, I shall never be able to look up at this roof
                  in storm or fair but I shall tremble.


ELDRED        Is it not enough that my ill stars have kept me abroad
                  to-night till this hour? I come home, and this is my
                  comfort!


ELEANOR       But did he say nothing which might have set you at ease?


ELDRED        I thought he grasped my hand while he was muttering
                  something about his Child--his Daughter--
       (starting as if he heard a noise).
                  What is that?


ELEANOR       Eldred, you are a father.


ELDRED        God knows what was in my heart, and will not curse my son
                  for my sake.


ELEANOR       But you prayed by him? you waited the hour of his release?


ELDRED        The night was wasting fast; I have no friend; I am spited
                   by the world--his wound terrified me--if I had
                   brought him along with me, and he had died in my
                   arms!----I am sure I heard something breathing--and
                   this chair!


ELEANOR       Oh, Eldred, you will die alone. You will have nobody to
                   close your eyes--no hand to grasp your dying hand--I
                   shall be in my grave. A curse will attend us all.


ELDRED        Have you forgot your own troubles when I was in the
                   dungeon?


ELEANOR       And you left him alive?


ELDRED        Alive!--the damps of death were upon him--he could not
                   have survived an hour.


ELEANOR       In the cold, cold night.


ELDRED (in a savage tone)
              Ay, and his head was bare; I suppose you would have had me
              lend my bonnet to cover it.--You will never rest till I am
              brought to a felon's end.


ELEANOR       Is there nothing to be done? cannot we go to the Convent?


ELDRED        Ay, and say at once that I murdered him!


ELEANOR       Eldred, I know that ours is the only house upon the Waste;
                  let us take heart; this Man may be rich; and could he
                  be saved by our means, his gratitude may reward us.


ELDRED        'Tis all in vain.


ELEANOR       But let us make the attempt. This old Man may have a wife,
                  and he may have children--let us return to the spot;
                  we may restore him, and his eyes may yet open upon
                  those that love him.


ELDRED        He will never open them more; even when he spoke to me, he
                  kept them firmly sealed as if he had been blind.


IDONEA (rushing out)
              It is, it is, my Father--


ELDRED        We are betrayed
       (looking at IDONEA).


ELEANOR       His Daughter!--God have mercy!
       (turning to IDONEA)


IDONEA (sinking down)
              Oh! lift me up and carry me to the place.
              You are safe; the whole world shall not harm you.


ELEANOR       This Lady is his Daughter.


ELDRED (moved)
              I'll lead you to the spot.


IDONEA (springing up)
              Alive!--you heard him breathe? quick, quick--


[Exeunt.]



ACT V


SCENE--A wood on the edge of the Waste

Enter OSWALD and a Forester.


FORESTER      He leaned upon the bridge that spans the glen,
              And down into the bottom cast his eye,
              That fastened there, as it would check the current.


OSWALD        He listened too; did you not say he listened?


FORESTER      As if there came such moaning from the flood
              As is heard often after stormy nights.


OSWALD        But did he utter nothing?


FORESTER      See him there!


[MARMADUKE appearing.]


MARMADUKE     Buzz, buzz, ye black and winged freebooters;
              That is no substance which ye settle on!


FORESTER      His senses play him false; and see, his arms
              Outspread, as if to save himself from falling!--
              Some terrible phantom I believe is now
              Passing before him, such as God will not
              Permit to visit any but a man
              Who has been guilty of some horrid crime.


[MARMADUKE disappears.]


OSWALD        The game is up!--


FORESTER      If it be needful, Sir,
              I will assist you to lay hands upon him.


OSWALD        No, no, my Friend, you may pursue your business--
              'Tis a poor wretch of an unsettled mind,
              Who has a trick of straying from his keepers;
              We must be gentle. Leave him to my care.
        [Exit Forester.]
              If his own eyes play false with him, these freaks
              Of fancy shall be quickly tamed by mine;
              The goal is reached. My Master shall become
              A shadow of myself--made by myself.


SCENE--The edge of the Moor.

MARMADUKE and ELDRED enter from opposite sides.


MARMADUKE (raising his eyes and perceiving ELDRED)
              In any corner of this savage Waste,
              Have you, good Peasant, seen a blind old Man?


ELDRED        I heard--


MARMADUKE     You heard him, where? when heard him?


ELDRED                                              As you know
              The first hours of last night were rough with storm:
              I had been out in search of a stray heifer;
              Returning late, I heard a moaning sound;
              Then, thinking that my fancy had deceived me,
              I hurried on, when straight a second moan,
              A human voice distinct, struck on my ear.
              So guided, distant a few steps, I found
              An aged Man, and such as you describe.


MARMADUKE     You heard!--he called you to him? Of all men
              The best and kindest!--but where is he? guide me,
              That I may see him.


ELDRED                            On a ridge of rocks
              A lonesome Chapel stands, deserted now:
              The bell is left, which no one dares remove;
              And, when the stormy wind blows o'er the peak,
              It rings, as if a human hand were there
              To pull the cord. I guess he must have heard it;
              And it had led him towards the precipice,
              To climb up to the spot whence the sound came;
              But he had failed through weakness. From his hand
              His staff had dropped, and close upon the brink
              Of a small pool of water he was laid,
              As if he had stooped to drink, and so remained
              Without the strength to rise.


MARMADUKE                                  Well, well, he lives,
              And all is safe: what said he?


ELDRED                                      But few words:
              He only spake to me of a dear Daughter,
              Who, so he feared, would never see him more;
              And of a Stranger to him, One by whom
              He had been sore misused; but he forgave
              The wrong and the wrong-doer. You are troubled--
              Perhaps you are his son?


MARMADUKE                             The All-seeing knows,
              I did not think he had a living Child.--
              But whither did you carry him?


ELDRED                                       He was torn,
              His head was bruised, and there was blood about him--


MARMADUKE     That was no work of mine.


ELDRED                                   Nor was it mine.


MARMADUKE     But had he strength to walk? I could have borne him
              A thousand miles.


ELDRED                          I am in poverty,
              And know how busy are the tongues of men;
              My heart was willing, Sir, but I am one
              Whose good deeds will not stand by their own light;
              And, though it smote me more than words can tell,
              I left him.


MARMADUKE                  I believe that there are phantoms,
              That in the shape of man do cross our path
              On evil instigation, to make sport
              Of our distress--and thou art one of them!
              But things substantial have so pressed on me--


ELDRED        My wife and children came into my mind.


MARMADUKE     Oh Monster! Monster! there are three of us,
              And we shall howl together.
       [After a pause and in a feeble voice.]
                      I am deserted
              At my worst need, my crimes have in a net
    (Pointing to ELDRED) Entangled this poor man.--
                  Where was it? where?
                      [Dragging him along.]


ELDRED        'Tis needless; spare your violence. His Daughter--


MARMADUKE     Ay, in the word a thousand scorpions lodge:
              This old man _had_ a Daughter.


ELDRED                                      To the spot
              I hurried back with her.--Oh save me, Sir,
              From such a journey!--there was a black tree,
              A single tree; she thought it was her Father.--
              Oh Sir, I would not see that hour again
              For twenty lives. The daylight dawned, and now--
              Nay; hear my tale, 'tis fit that you should hear it--
              As we approached, a solitary crow
              Rose from the spot;--the Daughter clapped her hands,
              And then I heard a shriek so terrible
   [MARMADUKE shrinks back.]
              The startled bird quivered upon the wing.


MARMADUKE     Dead, dead!--


ELDRED (after a pause)
                              A dismal matter, Sir, for me,
              And seems the like for you; if 'tis your wish,
              I'll lead you to his Daughter; but 'twere best
              That she should be prepared; I'll go before.


MARMADUKE     There will be need of preparation.


    [ELDRED goes off.]


ELEANOR (enters)
                                                  Master!
              Your limbs sink under you, shall I support you?


MARMADUKE (taking her arm)
              Woman, I've lent my body to the service
              Which now thou tak'st upon thee. God forbid
              That thou shouldst ever meet a like occasion
              With such a purpose in thine heart as mine was.


ELEANOR       Oh, why have I to do with things like these?

    [Exeunt.]



SCENE changes to the door of ELDRED'S cottage--IDONEA seated--enter
ELDRED.


ELDRED        Your Father, Lady, from a wilful hand
              Has met unkindness; so indeed he told me,
              And you remember such was my report:
              From what has just befallen me I have cause
              To fear the very worst.


IDONEA                                My Father is dead;
              Why dost thou come to me with words like these?


ELDRED        A wicked Man should answer for his crimes.


IDONEA        Thou seest me what I am.


ELDRED                                 It was most heinous,
              And doth call out for vengeance.


IDONEA                                        Do not add,
              I prith'ee, to the harm thou'st done already.


ELDRED        Hereafter you will thank me for this service.
              Hard by, a Man I met, who, from plain proofs
              Of interfering Heaven, I have no doubt,
              Laid hands upon your Father. Fit it were
              You should prepare to meet him.


IDONEA                                       I have nothing
              To do with others; help me to my Father--
         [She turns and sees MARMADUKE leaning on ELEANOR--throws herself
         upon his neck, and after some time,]
              In joy I met thee, but a few hours past;
              And thus we meet again; one human stay
              Is left me still in thee. Nay, shake not so.


MARMADUKE     In such a wilderness--to see no thing,
              No, not the pitying moon!


IDONEA                                  And perish so.


MARMADUKE     Without a dog to moan for him.


IDONEA                                      Think not of it,
              But enter there and see him how he sleeps,
              Tranquil as he had died in his own bed.


MARMADUKE     Tranquil--why not?


IDONEA                            Oh, peace!


MARMADUKE                                     He is at peace;
              His body is at rest: there was a plot,
              A hideous plot, against the soul of man:
              It took effect--and yet I baffled it,
              In _some_ degree.


IDONEA                           Between us stood, I thought,
              A cup of consolation, filled from Heaven
              For both our needs; must I, and in thy presence,
              Alone partake of it?--Beloved Marmaduke!


MARMADUKE     Give me a reason why the wisest thing
              That the earth owns shall never choose to die,
              But some one must be near to count his groans.
              The wounded deer retires to solitude,
              And dies in solitude: all things but man,
              All die in solitude.
      [Moving towards the cottage door.]
                  Mysterious God,
              If she had never lived I had not done it!--


IDONEA        Alas! the thought of such a cruel death
              Has overwhelmed him.--I must follow.


ELDRED                                            Lady!
              You will do well; (she goes) unjust suspicion may
              Cleave to this Stranger: if, upon his entering,
              The dead Man heave a groan, or from his side
              Uplift his hand--that would be evidence.


ELEANOR       Shame! Eldred, shame!


MARMADUKE (both returning)
                                    The dead have but one face.
          (To himself.)
              And such a Man--so meek and unoffending--
              Helpless and harmless as a babe: a Man,
              By obvious signal to the world's protection,
              Solemnly dedicated--to decoy him!--


IDONEA        Oh, had you seen him living!--


MARMADUKE                                    I (so filled
              With horror is this world) am unto thee
              The thing most precious, that it now contains:
              Therefore through me alone must be revealed
              By whom thy Parent was destroyed, Idonea!
              I have the proofs!--


IDONEA                               O miserable Father!
              Thou didst command me to bless all mankind;
              Nor to this moment, have I ever wished
              Evil to any living thing; but hear me,
              Hear me, ye Heavens!--
        (kneeling)                 --may vengeance haunt the fiend
              For this most cruel murder: let him live
              And move in terror of the elements;
              The thunder send him on his knees to prayer
              In the open streets, and let him think he sees,
              If e'er he entereth the house of God,
              The roof, self-moved, unsettling o'er his head;
              And let him, when he would lie down at night,
              Point to his wife the blood-drops on his pillow!


MARMADUKE     My voice was silent, but my heart hath joined thee.


IDONEA (leaning on MARMADUKE)
              Left to the mercy of that savage Man!
              How could he call upon his Child!--O Friend!
       [Turns to MARMADUKE.]
              My faithful true and only Comforter.


MARMADUKE     Ay, come to me and weep. (He kisses her.)
        (To ELDRED.) Yes, Varlet, look,
              The devils at such sights do clap their hands.
        [ELDRED retires alarmed.]


IDONEA        Thy vest is torn, thy cheek is deadly pale;
              Hast thou pursued the monster?


MARMADUKE                                    I have found him.--
              Oh! would that thou hadst perished in the flames!


IDONEA        Here art thou, then can I be desolate?--


MARMADUKE     There was a time, when this protecting hand
              Availed against the mighty; never more
              Shall blessings wait upon a deed of mine.


IDONEA        Wild words for me to hear, for me, an orphan,
              Committed to thy guardianship by Heaven;
              And, if thou hast forgiven me, let me hope,
              In this deep sorrow, trust, that I am thine
              For closer care;--here, is no malady.
      [Taking his arm.]


MARMADUKE     There, _is_ a malady--
    (Striking his heart and forehead.) And here, and here,
              A mortal malady.--I am accurst:
              All nature curses me, and in my heart
              _Thy_ curse is fixed; the truth must be laid bare.
              It must be told, and borne. I am the man,
              (Abused, betrayed, but how it matters not)
              Presumptuous above all that ever breathed,
              Who, casting as I thought a guilty Person
              Upon Heaven's righteous judgment, did become
              An instrument of Fiends. Through me, through me,
              Thy Father perished.


IDONEA                             Perished--by what mischance?


MARMADUKE     Beloved!--if I dared, so would I call thee--
              Conflict must cease, and, in thy frozen heart,
              The extremes of suffering meet in absolute peace.
          [He gives her a letter.]


IDONEA (reads)
              "Be not surprised if you hear that some signal judgment
              has befallen the man who calls himself your father; he is
              now with me, as his signature will shew: abstain from
              conjecture till you see me.
              "HERBERT.
              "MARMADUKE."
              The writing Oswald's; the signature my Father's:
       (Looks steadily at the paper.)
              And here is yours,--or do my eyes deceive me?
              You have then seen my Father?


MARMADUKE                                   He has leaned
              Upon this arm.


IDONEA                        You led him towards the Convent?


MARMADUKE     That Convent was Stone-Arthur Castle. Thither
              We were his guides. I on that night resolved
              That he should wait thy coming till the day
              Of resurrection.


IDONEA                            Miserable Woman,
              Too quickly moved, too easily giving way,
              I put denial on thy suit, and hence,
              With the disastrous issue of last night,
              Thy perturbation, and these frantic words.
              Be calm, I pray thee!


MARMADUKE                             Oswald--


IDONEA        Name him not.


[Enter Female Beggar.]


BEGGAR        And he is dead!--that Moor--how shall I cross it?
              By night, by day, never shall I be able
              To travel half a mile alone.--Good Lady!
              Forgive me!--Saints forgive me. Had I thought
              It would have come to this!--


IDONEA        What brings you hither? speak!


BEGGAR (pointing to MARMADUKE)
              This innocent Gentleman. Sweet heavens! I told him
              Such tales of your dead Father!--God is my judge,
              I thought there was no harm: but that bad Man,
              He bribed me with his gold, and looked so fierce.
              Mercy! I said I know not what--oh pity me--
              I said, sweet Lady, you were not his Daughter--
              Pity me, I am haunted;--thrice this day
              My conscience made me wish to be struck blind;
              And then I would have prayed, and had no voice.


IDONEA (to MARMADUKE)
              Was it my Father?--no, no, no, for he
              Was meek and patient, feeble, old and blind,
              Helpless, and loved me dearer than his life
             --But hear me. For _one_ question, I have a heart
              That will sustain me. Did you murder him?


MARMADUKE     No, not by stroke of arm. But learn the process:
              Proof after proof was pressed upon me; guilt
              Made evident, as seemed, by blacker guilt,
              Whose impious folds enwrapped even thee; and truth
              And innocence, embodied in his looks,
              His words and tones and gestures, did but serve
              With me to aggravate his crimes, and heaped
              Ruin upon the cause for which they pleaded.
              Then pity crossed the path of my resolve:
              Confounded, I looked up to Heaven, and cast,
              Idonea! thy blind Father, on the Ordeal
              Of the bleak Waste--left him--and so he died!--

[IDONEA sinks senseless; Beggar, ELEANOR, etc., crowd round, and bear
her off.]

              Why may we speak these things, and do no more;
              Why should a thrust of the arm have such a power,
              And words that tell these things be heard in vain?
              _She_ is not dead. Why!--if I loved this Woman,
              I would take care she never woke again;
              But she WILL wake, and she will weep for me,
              And say, no blame was mine--and so, poor fool,
              Will waste her curses on another name.


[He walks about distractedly.]

[Enter OSWALD.]


OSWALD (to himself)
              Strong to o'erturn, strong also to build up.
       [To MARMADUKE.]
              The starts and sallies of our last encounter
              Were natural enough; but that, I trust,
              Is all gone by. You have cast off the chains
              That fettered your nobility of mind--
              Delivered heart and head!
                  Let us to Palestine;
              This is a paltry field for enterprise.

MARMADUKE     Ay, what shall we encounter next? This issue--
              'Twas nothing more than darkness deepening darkness,
              And weakness crowned with the impotence of death!--
              Your pupil is, you see, an apt proficient.
         (ironically)
              Start not!--Here is another face hard by;
              Come, let us take a peep at both together,
              And, with a voice at which the dead will quake,
              Resound the praise of your morality--
              Of this too much.
     [Drawing OSWALD towards the Cottage--stops short at the door.]
                  Men are there, millions, Oswald,
              Who with bare hands would have plucked out thy heart
              And flung it to the dogs: but I am raised
              Above, or sunk below, all further sense
              Of provocation. Leave me, with the weight
              Of that old Man's forgiveness on thy heart,
              Pressing as heavily as it doth on mine.
              Coward I have been; know, there lies not now
              Within the compass of a mortal thought,
              A deed that I would shrink from;--but to endure,
              That is my destiny. May it be thine:
              Thy office, thy ambition, be henceforth
              To feed remorse, to welcome every sting
              Of penitential anguish, yea with tears.
              When seas and continents shall lie between us--
              The wider space the better--we may find
              In such a course fit links of sympathy,
              An incommunicable rivalship
              Maintained, for peaceful ends beyond our view.
    [Confused voices--several of the Band enter--rush upon OSWALD and
    seize him.]


ONE OF THEM   I would have dogged him to the jaws of hell--


OSWALD        Ha! is it so!--That vagrant Hag!--this comes
              Of having left a thing like her alive!     [Aside.]


SEVERAL VOICES
              Despatch him!


OSWALD                       If I pass beneath a rock
              And shout, and, with the echo of my voice,
              Bring down a heap of rubbish, and it crush me,
              I die without dishonour. Famished, starved,
              A Fool and Coward blended to my wish!
      [Smiles scornfully and exultingly at MARMADUKE.]


WALLACE       'Tis done! (Stabs him.)


ANOTHER OF THE BAND
                            The ruthless traitor!


MARMADUKE                                       A rash deed!--
              With that reproof I do resign a station
              Of which I have been proud.



WILFRED (approaching MARMADUKE)
             O my poor Master!


MARMADUKE     Discerning Monitor, my faithful Wilfred,
              Why art thou here?
     [Turning to WALLACE.]
                                Wallace, upon these Borders,
              Many there be whose eyes will not want cause
              To weep that I am gone. Brothers in arms!
              Raise on that dreary Waste a monument
              That may record my story: nor let words--
              Few must they be, and delicate in their touch
              As light itself--be there withheld from Her
              Who, through most wicked arts, was made an orphan
              By One who would have died a thousand times,
              To shield her from a moment's harm. To you,
              Wallace and Wilfred, I commend the Lady,
              By lowly nature reared, as if to make her
              In all things worthier of that noble birth,
              Whose long-suspended rights are now on the eve
              Of restoration: with your tenderest care
              Watch over her, I pray--sustain her--


SEVERAL OF THE BAND (eagerly)
              Captain!


MARMADUKE     No more of that; in silence hear my doom:
              A hermitage has furnished fit relief
              To some offenders; other penitents,
              Less patient in their wretchedness, have fallen,
              Like the old Roman, on their own sword's point.
              They had their choice: a wanderer _must I_ go,
              The Spectre of that innocent Man, my guide.
              No human ear shall ever hear me speak;
              No human dwelling ever give me food,
              Or sleep, or rest: but, over waste and wild,
              In search of nothing, that this earth can give,
              But expiation, will I wander on--
              A Man by pain and thought compelled to live,
              Yet loathing life--till anger is appeased
              In Heaven, and Mercy gives me leave to die.





       *       *       *       *       *





In June 1797 Coleridge wrote to his friend Cottle:

  "W. has written a tragedy himself. I speak with heart-felt sincerity,
  and, I think, unblinded judgment, when I tell you that I feel myself a
  little man by his side, and yet I do not think myself a less man than
  I formerly thought myself. His drama is absolutely wonderful. You know
  I do not commonly speak in such abrupt and unmingled phrases, and
  therefore will the more readily believe me. There are in the piece
  those profound touches of the human heart which I find three or four
  times in the 'Robbers' of Schiller, and often in Shakspeare; but in W.
  there are no inequalities."


On August 6, 1800, Charles Lamb wrote to Coleridge:

  "I would pay five-and-forty thousand carriages to read W.'s tragedy,
  of which I have heard so much and seen so little." Shortly afterwards,
  August 26, he wrote to Coleridge: "I have a sort of a recollection
  that somebody, I think _you_, promised me a sight of Wordsworth's
  tragedy. I shall be very glad of it just now, for I have got Manning
  with me, and should like to read it _with him_. But this, I confess,
  is a refinement. Under any circumstances, alone, in Cold-Bath Prison,
  or in the desert island, just when Prospero and his crew had set off,
  with Caliban in a cage, to Milan, it would be a treat to me to read
  that play. Manning has read it, so has Lloyd, and all Lloyd's family;
  but I could not get him to betray his trust by giving me a sight of
  it. Lloyd is sadly deficient in some of those virtuous vices."--Ed.



         *       *       *       *       *

  VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


  [Variant 1:

1845.

    ... female ...      1842.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

    Ha! ...    1842.]


[Variant 3:

1849.

    With whom you parted?    1842.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

    ... o'er ...    1842.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT


[Footnote A: He doubtless refers to the lines (Act iii. l. 405) "Action
is transitory--a step, a blow," etc., which followed the Dedication of
'The White Doe of Rylstone' in the edition of 1836.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Note prefixed to the edition of 1842.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Note appended to the edition of 1842.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE REVERIE OF POOR SUSAN


Composed 1797.--Published 1800.


  [Written 1801 or 1802. This arose out of my observations of the
  affecting music of these birds, hanging in this way in the London
  streets during the freshness and stillness of the spring morning.--I.
  F.]

Placed by Wordsworth among his "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.

The preceding Fenwick note to this poem is manifestly inaccurate as to
date, since the poem is printed in the "Lyrical Ballads" of 1800. In the
edition of 1836 the date of composition is given as 1797, and this date
is followed by Mr. Carter, the editor of 1857. Miss Wordsworth's Journal
gives no date; and, as the Fenwick note is certainly incorrect--and the
poem must have been written before the edition of 1800 came out--it
seems best to trust to the date sanctioned by Wordsworth himself in
1836, and followed by his literary executor in 1857. I think it probable
that the poem was written during the short visit which Wordsworth and
his sister paid to their brother Richard in London in 1797, when he
tried to get his tragedy, 'The Borderers', brought on the stage. The
title of the poem from 1800 to 1805 was 'Poor Susan'.--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  At the corner of Wood Street, when daylight appears,
  Hangs a Thrush [1] that sings loud, it has sung for three years:
  Poor Susan has passed by the spot, and has heard
  In the silence of morning the song of the Bird.

  'Tis a note of enchantment; what ails her? She sees              5
  A mountain ascending, a vision of trees;
  Bright volumes of vapour through Lothbury glide,
  And a river flows on through the vale of Cheapside.

  Green pastures she views [A] in the midst of the dale,
  Down which she so often has tripped with her pail;              10
  And a single small cottage, a nest like a dove's,
  The one only [2] dwelling on earth that she loves.

  She looks, and her heart is in heaven: but they fade,
  The mist and the river, the hill and the shade:
  The stream will not flow, and the hill will not rise,           15
  And the colours have all passed away from her eyes! [3]



       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1820.

    There's a Thrush ...    1800.]



[Variant 2:

1802.

    The only one ...        1800.]


[Variant 3: The following stanza, in the edition of 1800, was omitted in
subsequent ones:

    Poor Outcast! return--to receive thee once more
    The house of thy Father will open its door,
    And thou once again, in thy plain russet gown,
    May'st hear the thrush sing from a tree of its own. [i]]



       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT


[Footnote A: Wordsworth originally wrote "sees." S.T.C. suggested
"views."--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON VARIANT 3

[Sub-Footnote i:

  "Susan stood for the representative of poor '_Rus in urbe_.' There was
  quite enough to stamp the moral of the thing never to be forgotten;
  'bright volumes of vapour,' etc. The last verse of Susan was to be got
  rid of, at all events. It threw a kind of dubiety upon Susan's moral
  conduct. Susan is a servant maid. I see her trundling her mop, and
  contemplating the whirling phenomenon through blurred optics; but to
  term her 'a poor outcast' seems as much as to say that poor Susan was
  no better than she should be, which I trust was not what you meant to
  express."

Charles Lamb to Wordsworth. See 'The Letters of Charles Lamb', edited by
Alfred Ainger, vol. i., p. 287.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





1798

A NIGHT PIECE


Composed 1798.--Published 1815.


  [Composed on the road between Nether Stowey and Alfoxden, extempore. I
  distinctly recollect the very moment when I was struck, as
  described,--'He looks up, the clouds are split,' etc.--I. F.]


Classed by Wordsworth among his "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *


   --The sky is overcast
  With a continuous cloud of texture close,
  Heavy and wan, all whitened by the Moon,
  Which through that veil is indistinctly seen,
  A dull, contracted circle, yielding light                         5
  So feebly spread, that not a shadow falls,
  Chequering the ground--from rock, plant, tree, or tower.
  At length a pleasant instantaneous gleam
  Startles the pensive traveller while [1] he treads
  His lonesome path, with unobserving eye                          10
  Bent earthwards; he looks up--the clouds are split
  Asunder,--and above his head he sees
  The clear Moon, and the glory of the heavens.
  There, in a black-blue vault she sails along,
  Followed by multitudes of stars, that, small                     15
  And sharp, and bright, [A] along the dark abyss
  Drive as she drives: how fast they wheel away,
  Yet vanish not!--the wind is in the tree,
  But they are silent;--still they roll along
  Immeasurably distant; and the vault,                             20
  Built round by those white clouds, enormous clouds,
  Still deepens its unfathomable depth.
  At length the Vision closes; and the mind,
  Not undisturbed by the delight it feels,
  Which slowly settles into peaceful calm,                         25
  Is left to muse upon the solemn scene.



         *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827

    ... as ...    1815.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The indebtedness of the Poet to his Sister is nowhere more
conspicuous than in this Poem. In Dorothy Wordsworth's Alfoxden Journal
the following occurs, under date 25th January 1798:

  "Went to Poole's after tea. The sky spread over with one continuous
  cloud, whitened by the light of the moon, which, though her dim shape
  was seen, did not throw forth so strong a light as to chequer the
  earth with shadows. At once the clouds seemed to cleave asunder, and
  lift her in the centre of a black-blue vault. She sailed along,
  followed by multitudes of stars, small, and bright, and sharp; their
  brightness seemed concentrated."

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





WE ARE SEVEN


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [Written at Alfoxden in the spring of 1798, under circumstances
  somewhat remarkable. The little girl who is the heroine, I met within
  the area of Goodrich Castle in the year 1793. Having left the Isle of
  Wight, and crost Salisbury Plain, as mentioned in the preface to
  'Guilt and Sorrow', I proceeded by Bristol up the Wye, and so on to N.
  Wales to the Vale of Clwydd, where I spent my summer under the roof of
  the father of my friend, Robert Jones.

  In reference to this poem, I will here mention one of the most
  remarkable facts in my own poetic history, and that of Mr. Coleridge.
  In the spring of the year 1798, he, my sister, and myself, started
  from Alfoxden pretty late in the afternoon, with a view to visit
  Linton and the Valley of Stones near it; and as our united funds were
  very small, we agreed to defray the expense of the tour by writing a
  poem, to be sent to the 'New Monthly Magazine', set up by Philips, the
  bookseller, and edited by Dr. Aikin. Accordingly we set off, and
  proceeded along the Quantock Hills, towards Watchet; and in the course
  of this walk was planned the poem of 'The Ancient Mariner', founded on
  a dream, as Mr. Coleridge said, of his friend Mr. Cruikshank. Much the
  greatest part of the story was Mr. Coleridge's invention; but certain
  parts I myself suggested: for example, some crime was to be committed
  which should bring upon the Old Navigator, as Coleridge afterwards
  delighted to call him, the spectral persecution, as a consequence of
  that crime, and his own wanderings. I had been reading in Shelvocke's
  'Voyages', a day or two before, that, while doubling Cape Horn, they
  frequently saw albatrosses in that latitude, the largest sort of
  sea-fowl, some extending their wings twelve or thirteen feet.
  'Suppose,' said I, 'you represent him as having killed one of these
  birds on entering the South Sea, and that the tutelary spirits of
  these regions take upon them to avenge the crime.' The incident was
  thought fit for the purpose, and adopted accordingly. I also suggested
  the navigation of the ship by the dead men, but do not recollect that
  I had anything more to do with the scheme of the poem. The gloss with
  which it was subsequently accompanied was not thought of by either of
  us at the time; at least not a hint of it was given to me, and I have
  no doubt it was a gratuitous after-thought. We began the composition
  together, on that to me memorable evening: I furnished two or three
  lines at the beginning of the poem, in particular--

    And listen'd like a three years' child;
    The Mariner had his will.

  These trifling contributions, all but one (which Mr. C. has with
  unnecessary scrupulosity recorded), slipt out of his mind, as well
  they might. As we endeavoured to proceed conjointly (I speak of the
  same evening), our respective manners proved so widely different, that
  it would have been quite presumptuous in me to do anything but
  separate from an undertaking upon which I could only have been a clog.
  We returned after a few days from a delightful tour, of which I have
  many pleasant, and some of them droll enough, recollections. We
  returned by Dulverton to Alfoxden. 'The Ancient Mariner' grew and grew
  till it became too important for our first object, which was limited
  to our expectation of five pounds; and we began to talk of a volume
  which was to consist, as Mr. Coleridge has told the world, of Poems
  chiefly on natural subjects taken from common life, but looked at, as
  much as might be, through an imaginative medium. Accordingly I wrote
  'The Idiot Boy', 'Her eyes are wild', etc., 'We are Seven', 'The
  Thorn', and some others. To return to 'We are Seven', the piece that
  called forth this note, I composed it while walking in the grove at
  Alfoxden. My friends will not deem it too trifling to relate, that
  while walking to and fro I composed the last stanza first, having
  begun with the last line. When it was all but finished, I came in and
  recited it to Mr. Coleridge and my sister, and said, "A prefatory
  stanza must be added, and I should sit down to our little tea-meal
  with greater pleasure if my task was finished." I mentioned in
  substance what I wished to be expressed, and Coleridge immediately
  threw off the stanza, thus;

    A little child, dear brother Jem,

  I objected to the rhyme, 'dear brother Jem,' as being ludicrous; but
  we all enjoyed the joke of hitching in our friend James Tobin's name,
  who was familiarly called Jem. He was the brother of the dramatist;
  and this reminds me of an anecdote which it may be worth while here to
  notice. The said Jem got a sight of the "Lyrical Ballads" as it was
  going through the press at Bristol, during which time I was residing
  in that city. One evening he came to me with a grave face, and said,
  "Wordsworth, I have seen the volume that Coleridge and you are about
  to publish. There is one poem in it which I earnestly entreat you will
  cancel, for, if published, it will make you everlastingly ridiculous."
  I answered, that I felt much obliged by the interest he took in my
  good name as a writer, and begged to know what was the unfortunate
  piece he alluded to. He said, 'It is called 'We are Seven'.' 'Nay,'
  said I, 'that shall take its chance, however'; and he left me in
  despair. I have only to add, that in the spring [A] of 1841, I
  revisited Goodrich Castle, not having seen that part of the Wye since
  I met the little girl there in 1793. It would have given me greater
  pleasure to have found in the neighbouring hamlet traces of one who
  had interested me so much, but that was impossible, as unfortunately I
  did not even know her name. The ruin, from its position and features,
  is a most impressive object. I could not but deeply regret that its
  solemnity was impaired by a fantastic new Castle set up on a
  projection of the same ridge, as if to show how far modern art can go
  in surpassing all that could be done by antiquity and nature with
  their united graces, remembrances, and associations. I could have
  almost wished for power, so much the contrast vexed me, to blow away
  Sir----Meyrick's impertinent structure and all the fopperies it
  contains.--I. F.]


       *       *       *       *       *

The "structure" referred to is Goodrich Court, built in 1828 by Sir
Samuel Rush Meyrick--a collector of ancient armour, and a great
authority on the subject--mainly to receive his extensive private
collection. The armour has been removed from Goodrich to the South
Kensington Museum. 'We are Seven' was placed by Wordsworth among his
"Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


 --A simple Child, [1]
  That lightly draws its breath,
  And feels its life in every limb,
  What should it know of death? [B]

  I met a little cottage Girl:                                    5
  She was eight years old, she said;
  Her hair was thick with many a curl
  That clustered round her head.

  She had a rustic, woodland air,
  And she was wildly clad:                                       10
  Her eyes were fair, and very fair;
 --Her beauty made me glad.

  "Sisters and brothers, little Maid,
  How many may you be?"
  "How many? Seven in all," she said,                            15
  And wondering looked at me.

  "And where are they? I pray you tell."
  She answered, "Seven are we;
  And two of us at Conway dwell,
  And two are gone to sea.                                       20

  "Two of us in the church-yard lie,
  My sister and my brother;
  And, in the church-yard cottage, I
  Dwell near them with my mother."

  "You say that two at Conway dwell,                             25
  And two are gone to sea,
  Yet ye [2] are seven! I pray you tell,
  Sweet Maid, how this may be."

  Then did the little Maid reply,
  "Seven boys and girls are we;                                  30
  Two of us in the church-yard lie,
  Beneath the church-yard tree."

  "You run about, my little Maid,
  Your limbs they are alive;
  If two are in the church-yard laid,                            35
  Then ye are only five."

  "Their graves are green, they may be seen,"
  The little Maid replied,
  "Twelve steps or more from my mother's door,
  And they are side by side.                                     40

  "My stockings there I often knit,
  My kerchief there I hem;
  And there upon the ground I sit,
  And sing a song to them. [3]

  "And often after sun-set, Sir,                                 45
  When it is light and fair,
  I take my little porringer,
  And eat my supper there.

  "The first that died was sister Jane; [4]
  In bed she moaning lay,                                        50
  Till God released her of her pain;
  And then she went away.

  "So in the church-yard she was laid;
  And, when the grass was dry, [5]
  Together round her grave we played,                            55
  My brother John and I.

  "And when the ground was white with snow,
  And I could run and slide,
  My brother John was forced to go,
  And he lies by her side."                                      60

  "How many are you, then," said I,
  "If they two are in heaven?"
  Quick was the little Maid's reply, [6]
  "O Master! we are seven."

  "But they are dead; those two are dead!                        65
  Their spirits are in heaven!"
  'Twas throwing words away; for still
  The little Maid would have her will,
  And said, "Nay, we are seven!"



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1815.

    A simple child, dear brother Jim,    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

    ... you ...    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

    I sit and sing to them.    1798.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

    ... little Jane;    1798.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

    And all the summer dry,    1798.]


[Variant 6:

1836.

    The little Maiden did reply,    1798.]


       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT


[Footnote A: It was in June, after leaving Alfoxden finally.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: The whole of this stanza was written by Coleridge. In a MS.
copy of the poem, transcribed by him, after 1806, Wordsworth gave it the
title 'We are Seven, or Death', but afterwards restored the original
title.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





ANECDOTE FOR FATHERS


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


    'Retine vim istam, falsa enim dicam, si coges.'

    EUSEBIUS. [A]


       *       *       *       *       *

  [This was suggested in front of Alfoxden. The boy was a son of my
  friend, Basil Montagu, who had been two or three years under our care.
  The name of Kilve is from a village on the Bristol Channel, about a
  mile from Alfoxden; and the name of Liswyn Farm was taken from a
  beautiful spot on the Wye, where Mr. Coleridge, my sister, and I had
  been visiting the famous John Thelwall, who had taken refuge from
  politics, after a trial for high treason, with a view to bring up his
  family by the profits of agriculture, which proved as unfortunate a
  speculation as that he had fled from. Coleridge and he had both been
  public lecturers; Coleridge mingling, with his politics, Theology,
  from which the other elocutionist abstained, unless it was for the
  sake of a sneer. This quondam community of public employment induced
  Thelwall to visit Coleridge at Nether Stowey, where he fell in my way.
  He really was a man of extraordinary talent, an affectionate husband,
  and a good father. Though brought up in the city, on a tailor's board,
  he was truly sensible of the beauty of natural objects. I remember
  once, when Coleridge, he, and I were seated together upon the turf, on
  the brink of a stream in the most beautiful part of the most beautiful
  glen of Alfoxden, Coleridge exclaimed, 'This is a place to reconcile
  one to all the jarrings and conflicts of the wide world.' 'Nay,' said
  Thelwall, 'to make one forget them altogether.' The visit of this man
  to Coleridge was, as I believe Coleridge has related, the occasion of
  a spy being sent by Government to watch our proceedings; which were, I
  can say with truth, such as the world at large would have thought
  ludicrously harmless.--I. F.]


       *       *       *       *       *

In the editions 1798 to 1843 the title of this poem is 'Anecdote for
Fathers, showing how the practice [1] of lying may be taught'. It was
placed among the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  I have a boy of five years old;
  His face is fair and fresh to see;
  His limbs are cast in beauty's mould,
  And dearly he loves me.

  One morn we strolled on our dry walk,                            5
  Our quiet home [2] all full in view,
  And held such intermitted talk
  As we are wont to do.

  My thoughts on former pleasures ran;
  I thought of Kilve's delightful shore,                          10
  Our [3] pleasant home when spring began,
  A long, long year before.

  A day it was when I could bear
  Some fond regrets to entertain; [4]
  With so much happiness to spare,                                15
  I could not feel a pain.

  The green earth echoed to the feet
  Of lambs that bounded through the glade,
  From shade to sunshine, and as fleet
  From sunshine back to shade.[5]                                 20

  Birds warbled round me--and each trace
  Of inward sadness had its charm;
  Kilve, thought I, was a favoured place,[6]
  And so is Liswyn farm.

  My boy beside me tripped, so slim                               25
  And graceful in his rustic dress!
  And, as we talked, I questioned him, [7]
  In very idleness.

  "Now tell me, had you rather be,"
  I said, and took him by the arm,                                30
  "On Kilve's smooth shore, by the green sea,
  Or here at Liswyn farm?" [8]

  In careless mood he looked at me,
  While still I held him by the arm,
  And said, "At Kilve I'd rather be                               35
  Than here at Liswyn farm."

  "Now, little Edward, say why so:
  My little Edward, tell me why."--
  "I cannot tell, I do not know."--
  "Why, this is strange," said I;                                 40

  "For, here are woods, hills smooth and warm: [9]
  There surely must some reason be
  Why you would change sweet Liswyn farm
  For Kilve by the green sea."

  At this, my boy hung down his head,                             45
  He blushed with shame, nor made reply; [10]
  And three times to the child I said, [11]
  "Why, Edward, tell me why?"

  His head he raised--there was in sight,
  It caught his eye, he saw it plain--                           50
  Upon the house-top, glittering bright,
  A broad and gilded vane.

  Then did the boy his tongue unlock,
  And eased his mind with this reply: [12]
  "At Kilve there was no weather-cock;                            55
  And that's the reason why."

  O dearest, dearest boy! my heart
  For better lore would seldom yearn,
  Could I but teach the hundredth part
  Of what from thee I learn. [B]                                  60


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1800.

    the art ...    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1802.

    ... house ...    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1802.

    My ...    1798.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

    To think, and think, and think again;    1798.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

    The young lambs ran a pretty race;
    The morning sun shone bright and warm;
    "Kilve," said I, "was a pleasant place,
    And so is Liswyn farm."                  1798.]


[Variant 6:

1836.

    ...--every trace
    Of inward sadness had its charm;
    "Kilve," said I, ...               1827.

This verse was introduced in 1827.]


[Variant 7: 1836.

    My boy was by my side, so slim
    And graceful in his rustic dress!
    And oftentimes I talked to him,     1798.

This was stanza v. from 1798 to 1820.

    And, as we talked, I questioned him,     1827.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

    "My little boy, which like you more,"
    I said and took him by the arm--
    "Our home by Kilve's delightful shore,
    Or here at Liswyn farm?"

    "And tell me, had you rather be,"
    I said and held him by the arm,
    "At Kilve's smooth shore by the green sea,
    Or here at Liswyn farm?"                  1798.

These two stanzas were compressed into one in 1827.]


[Variant 9:

1836.

    For, here are woods and green-hills warm;     1798.]


[Variant 10:

1800.

    At this, my boy, so fair and slim,
    Hung down his head, nor made reply;     1798.]


[Variant 11:

1845.

    And five times did I say to him,        1798.

    And five times to the child I said,     1800.]


[Variant 12:

1836.

    And thus to me he made reply;     1798.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See Appendix IV.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Mr. Ernest H. Coleridge writes to me of this poem:

  "The Fenwick note is most puzzling.

  1. If Coleridge went to visit Thelwall, with Wordsworth and Dorothy in
  July 1798, this is the only record; but I suppose that he did.

  2. How could the poem have been suggested in front of Alfoxden? The
  visit to Liswyn took place after the Wordsworths had left Alfoxden
  never to return. If little Montagu ever did compare Kilve and Liswyn
  Farm, he must have done so after he left Alfoxden. The scene is laid
  at Liswyn, and if the poem was written at Alfoxden, before the party
  visited Liswyn, the supposed reply was invented to a supposed question
  which might be put to the child when he got to Liswyn. How unlike
  Wordsworth.

  3. Thelwall came to Alfoxden at the commencement of Wordsworth's
  tenancy; and the visit to Wales took place when the tenancy was over,
  July 3-10."

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"A WHIRL-BLAST FROM BEHIND THE HILL"


Composed March 18, 1798.--Published 1800.


  [Observed in the holly-grove at Alfoxden, where these verses were
  written in the spring of 1799. [A] I had the pleasure of again seeing,
  with dear friends, this grove in unimpaired beauty forty-one years
  after. [B]--I. F.]

Classed among the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  A whirl-blast from behind the hill
  Rushed o'er the wood with startling sound;
  Then--all at once the air was still,
  And showers of hailstones pattered round.
  Where leafless oaks towered high above,                        5
  I sat within an undergrove
  Of tallest hollies, tall and green;
  A fairer bower was never seen.
  From year to year the spacious floor
  With withered leaves is covered o'er,                         10
  [1] And all the year the bower is green. [C]
  But see! where'er the hailstones drop
  The withered leaves all skip and hop;
  There's not a breeze--no breath of air--
  Yet here, and there, and every where                          15
  Along the floor, beneath the shade
  By those embowering hollies made,
  The leaves in myriads jump and spring,
  As if with pipes and music rare
  Some Robin Good-fellow were there,                            20
  And all those leaves, in festive glee,
  Were dancing to the minstrelsy. [2] [3] [D]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1820.

    You could not lay a hair between:

Inserted in the editions 1800-1815.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

    And all those leaves, that jump and spring,
    Were each a joyous, living thing.    1800.]


[Variant 3: The following additional lines occur in the editions 1800 to
1805:

    Oh! grant me Heaven a heart at ease
    That I may never cease to find,
    Even in appearances like these
    Enough to nourish and to stir my mind!]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal gives the date 1798, and in
the spring of 1799 the Wordsworths were not at Alfoxden but in
Germany.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: The friends were Mrs. Wordsworth, Miss Fenwick, Edward and
Dora Quillinan, and William Wordsworth (the poet's son). The date was
May 13, 1841.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare a letter from Wordsworth to Sir George Beaumont,
written in November 1806, and one to Lady Beaumont in December
1806.--Ed.]


[Footnote D:

  "March 18, 1708. The Coleridges left us. A cold windy morning. Walked
  with them half-way. On our return, sheltered under the hollies during
  a hail shower. The withered leaves danced with the hailstones. William
  wrote a description of the storm"

(Dorothy Wordsworth's Alfoxden Journal).--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE THORN


Composed March 19, 1798.--Published 1798.


In the editions of 1800-1805, Wordsworth added the following note to
this poem:

  "This Poem ought to have been preceded by an introductory Poem, which
  I have been prevented from writing by never having felt myself in a
  mood when it was probable that I should write it well.--The character
  which I have here introduced speaking is sufficiently common. The
  Reader will perhaps have a general notion of it, if he has ever known
  a man, a Captain of a small trading vessel for example, who being past
  the middle age of life, had retired upon an annuity or small
  independent income to some village or country town of which he was not
  a native, or in which he had not been accustomed to live. Such men
  having little to do become credulous and talkative from indolence; and
  from the same cause, and other predisposing causes by which it is
  probable that such men may have been affected, they are prone to
  superstition. On which account it appeared to me proper to select a
  character like this to exhibit some of the general laws by which
  superstition acts upon the mind. Superstitious men are almost always
  men of slow faculties and deep feelings; their minds are not loose but
  adhesive; they have a reasonable share of imagination, by which word I
  mean the faculty which produces impressive effects out of simple
  elements; but they are utterly destitute of fancy, the power by which
  pleasure and surprise are excited by sudden varieties of situation and
  by accumulated imagery.

  "It was my wish in this poem to shew the manner in which such men
  cleave to the same ideas; and to follow the turns of passion, always
  different, yet not palpably different, by which their conversation is
  swayed. I had two objects to attain; first, to represent a picture
  which should not be unimpressive yet consistent with the character
  that should describe it, secondly, while I adhered to the style in
  which such persons describe, to take care that words, which in their
  minds are impregnated with passion, should likewise convey passion to
  Readers who are not accustomed to sympathize with men feeling in that
  manner or using such language. It seemed to me that this might be done
  by calling in the assistance of Lyrical and rapid Metre. It was
  necessary that the Poem, to be natural, should in reality move slowly;
  yet I hoped, that, by the aid of the metre, to those who should at all
  enter into the spirit of the Poem, it would appear to move quickly.
  The Reader will have the kindness to excuse this note as I am sensible
  that an introductory Poem is necessary to give this Poem its full
  effect.

  "Upon this occasion I will request permission to add a few words
  closely connected with 'The Thorn' and many other Poems in these
  Volumes. There is a numerous class of readers who imagine that the
  same words cannot be repeated without tautology; this is a great
  error: virtual tautology is much oftener produced by using different
  words when the meaning is exactly the same. Words, a Poet's words more
  particularly, ought to be weighed in the balance of feeling and not
  measured by the space which they occupy upon paper. For the Reader
  cannot be too often reminded that Poetry is passion: it is the history
  or science of feelings: now every man must know that an attempt is
  rarely made to communicate impassioned feelings without something of
  an accompanying consciousness of the inadequateness of our own powers,
  or the deficiencies of language. During such efforts there will be a
  craving in the mind, and as long as it is unsatisfied the Speaker will
  cling to the same words, or words of the same character. There are
  also various other reasons why repetition and apparent tautology are
  frequently beauties of the highest kind. Among the chief of these
  reasons is the interest which the mind attaches to words, not only as
  symbols of the passion, but as 'things', active and efficient, which
  are of themselves part of the passion. And further, from a spirit of
  fondness, exultation, and gratitude, the mind luxuriates in the
  repetition of words which appear successfully to communicate its
  feelings. The truth of these remarks might be shown by innumerable
  passages from the Bible and from the impassioned poetry of every
  nation.

    Awake, awake, Deborah! awake, awake, utter a song: Arise Barak, and
    lead captivity captive, thou Son of Abinoam.

    At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he
    fell: where he bowed there he fell down dead.

    Why is his Chariot so long in coming? why tarry the Wheels of his
    Chariot?

    (Judges, chap. v. verses 12th, 27th, and part of 28th.)

  See also the whole of that tumultuous and wonderful Poem."

  "The poem of 'The Thorn', as the reader will soon discover, is not
  supposed to be spoken in the author's own person: the character of the
  loquacious narrator will sufficiently shew itself in the course of the
  story."

W. W. Advertisement to "Lyrical Ballads," 1798.


       *       *       *       *       *

  [Alfoxden, 1798. Arose out of my observing, on the ridge of Quantock
  Hill, on a stormy day, a thorn, which I had often past in calm and
  bright weather, without noticing it. I said to myself, "Cannot I by
  some invention do as much to make this Thorn permanently as an
  impressive object as the storm has made it to my eyes at this moment?"
  I began the poem accordingly, and composed it with great rapidity. Sir
  George Beaumont painted a picture from it, which Wilkie thought his
  best. He gave it me: though when he saw it several times at Rydal
  Mount afterwards, he said, 'I could make a better, and would like to
  paint the same subject over again.' The sky in this picture is nobly
  done, but it reminds one too much of Wilson. The only fault, however,
  of any consequence is the female figure, which is too old and decrepit
  for one likely to frequent an eminence on such a call.--I. F.]


       *       *       *       *       *

'The Thorn' was always placed among the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.



       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


I         "There is a Thorn--it looks so old,
          In truth, you'd find it hard to say
          How it could ever have been young,
          It looks so old and grey.
          Not higher than a two years' child                     5
          It stands erect, this aged Thorn;
          No leaves it has, no prickly [1] points;
          It is a mass of knotted joints,
          A wretched thing forlorn.
          It stands erect, and like a stone                     10
          With lichens is it overgrown. [2]


II        "Like rock or stone, it is o'ergrown,
          With lichens to the very top,
          And hung with heavy tufts of moss,
          A melancholy crop:                                    15
          Up from the earth these mosses creep,
          And this poor Thorn they clasp it round
          So close, you'd say that they are [3] bent
          With plain and manifest intent
          To drag it to the ground;                             20
          And all have [4] joined in one endeavour
          To bury this poor Thorn for ever.


III       "High on a mountain's highest ridge,
          Where oft the stormy winter gale
          Cuts like a scythe, while through the clouds          25
          It sweeps from vale to vale;
          Not five yards from the mountain path,
          This Thorn you on your left espy;
          And to the left, three yards beyond,
          You see a little muddy pond                           30
          Of water--never dry
          Though but of compass small, and bare
          To thirsty suns and parching air. [5] [A]


IV        "And, close beside this aged Thorn,
          There is a fresh and lovely sight,                    35
          A beauteous heap, a hill of moss,
          Just half a foot in height.
          All lovely colours there you see,
          All colours that were ever seen;
          And mossy network too is there,                       40
          As if by hand of lady fair
          The work had woven been;
          And cups, the darlings of the eye,
          So deep is their vermilion dye.


V         "Ah me! what lovely tints are there                   45
          Of olive green and scarlet bright,
          In spikes, in branches, and in stars,
          Green, red, and pearly white!
          This heap of earth o'ergrown with moss,
          Which close beside the Thorn you see,                 50
          So fresh in all its beauteous dyes,
          Is like an infant's grave in size,
          As like as like can be:
          But never, never any where,
          An infant's grave was half so fair.                   55


VI        "Now would you see this aged Thorn,
          This pond, and beauteous hill of moss,
          You must take care and choose your time
          The mountain when to cross.
          For oft there sits between the heap                   60
          So like [6] an infant's grave in size,
          And that same pond of which I spoke,
          A Woman in a scarlet cloak,
          And to herself she cries,
          'Oh misery! oh misery!                                65
          Oh woe is me! oh misery!'


VII       "At all times of the day and night
          This wretched Woman thither goes;
          And she is known to every star,
          And every wind that blows;                            70
          And there, beside the Thorn, she sits
          When the blue daylight's in the skies,
          And when the whirlwind's on the hill,
          Or frosty air is keen and still
          And to herself she cries,                             75
          'Oh misery! oh misery!
          Oh woe is me! oh misery!'"


VIII      "Now wherefore, thus, by day and night,
          In rain, in tempest, and in snow,
          Thus to the dreary mountain-top                       80
          Does this poor Woman go?
          And why sits she beside the Thorn
          When the blue daylight's in the sky,
          Or when the whirlwind's on the hill,
          Or frosty air is keen and still,                      85
          And wherefore does she cry?--
          O wherefore? wherefore? tell me why
          Does she repeat that doleful cry?"


IX        "I cannot tell; I wish I could;
          For the true reason no one knows:                     90
          But would you [7] gladly view the spot,
          The spot to which she goes;
          The hillock like [8] an infant's grave,
          The pond--and Thorn, so old and grey;
          Pass by her door--'tis seldom shut--                 95
          And, if you see her in her hut--
          Then to the spot away!
          I never heard of such as dare
          Approach the spot when she is there."


X         "But wherefore to the mountain-top                   100
          Can this unhappy Woman go,
          Whatever star is in the skies,
          Whatever wind may blow?" [9]
          "Full twenty years are past and gone [10]
          Since she (her name is Martha Ray)                   105
          Gave with a maiden's true good-will
          Her company to Stephen Hill;
          And she was blithe and gay,
          While friends and kindred all approved
          Of him whom tenderly she loved. [11]                 110


XI        "And they had fixed the wedding day,
          The morning that must wed them both;
          But Stephen to another Maid
          Had sworn another oath;
          And, with this other Maid, to church                 115
          Unthinking Stephen went--
          Poor Martha! on that woeful day
          A pang of pitiless dismay
          Into her soul was sent;
          A fire was kindled in her breast,                    121
          Which might not burn itself to rest. [12]


XII       "They say, full six months after this,
          While yet the summer leaves were green,
          She to the mountain-top would go,                    125
          And there was often seen.
          What could she seek?--or wish to hide?
          Her state to any eye was plain; [13]
          She was with child, and she was mad;
          Yet often was she [14] sober sad                     130
          From her exceeding pain.
          O guilty Father--would that death
          Had saved him from that breach of faith! [15]


XIII      "Sad case for such a brain to hold
          Communion with a stirring child!                     135
          Sad case, as you may think, for one
          Who had a brain so wild!
          Last Christmas-eve we talked of this,
          And grey-haired Wilfred of the glen
          Held that the unborn infant wrought [16]             140
          About its mother's heart, and brought
          Her senses back again:
          And, when at last her time drew near,
          Her looks were calm, her senses clear.


XIV       "More know I not, I wish I did,                      145
          And it should all be told to you; [17]
          For what became of this poor child
          No mortal ever knew; [18]
          Nay--if a child to her was born
          No earthly tongue could ever tell; [19]              150
          And if 'twas born alive or dead,
          Far less could this with proof be said; [20]
          But some remember well,
          That Martha Ray about this time
          Would up the mountain often climb.                   155


XV        "And all that winter, when at night
          The wind blew from the mountain-peak,
          'Twas worth your while, though in the dark,
          The churchyard path to seek:
          For many a time and oft were heard                   160
          Cries coming from the mountain head:
          Some plainly living voices were;
          And others, I've heard many swear,
          Were voices of the dead:
          I cannot think, whate'er they say,                   165
          They had to do with Martha Ray.


XVI       "But that she goes to this old Thorn,
          The Thorn which I described [21] to you,
          And there sits in a scarlet cloak,
          I will be sworn is true.                             170
          For one day with my telescope,
          To view the ocean wide and bright,
          When to this country first I came,
          Ere I had heard of Martha's name,
          I climbed the mountain's height:--                  175
          A storm came on, and I could see
          No object higher than my knee.


XVII      "'Twas mist and rain, and storm and rain:
          No screen, no fence could I discover;
          And then the wind! in sooth, [22] it was             180
          A wind full ten times over.
          I looked around, I thought I saw
          A jutting crag,--and off I ran,
          Head-foremost, through the driving rain,
          The shelter of the crag to gain;                     185
          And, as I am a man,
          Instead of jutting crag, I found
          A Woman seated on the ground.


XVIII     "I did not speak--I saw her face;
          Her face!--it was [23] enough for me:                190
          I turned about and heard her cry,
          'Oh misery! oh misery!'
          And there she sits, until the moon
          Through half the clear blue sky will go;
          And, when the little breezes make                    195
          The waters of the pond to shake,
          As all the country know,
          She shudders, and you hear her cry,
          'Oh misery! oh misery!'"


XIX       "But what's the Thorn? and what the pond?            200
          And what the hill of moss to her?
          And what the creeping breeze that comes [24]
          The little pond to stir?"
          "I cannot tell; but some will say
          She hanged her baby on the tree;                     205
          Some say she drowned it in the pond,
          Which is a little step beyond:
          But all and each agree,
          The little Babe was buried there,
          Beneath that hill of moss so fair.                   210


XX        "I've heard, the moss is spotted red [25]
          With drops of that poor infant's blood;
          But kill a new-born infant thus,
          I do not think she could!
          Some say, if to the pond you go,                     215
          And fix on it a steady view,
          The shadow of a babe you trace,
          A baby and a baby's face,
          And that it looks at you;
          Whene'er you look on it, 'tis plain                  220
          The baby looks at you again.


XXI       "And some had sworn an oath that she
          Should be to public justice brought;
          And for the little infant's bones
          With spades they would have sought.                  225
          But instantly the hill of moss [26]
          Before their eyes began to stir!
          And, for full fifty yards around,
          The grass--it shook upon the ground!
          Yet [27] all do still aver                           230
          The little Babe lies [28] buried there,
          Beneath that hill of moss so fair.


XXII      "I cannot tell how this may be
          But plain it is the Thorn is bound
          With heavy tufts of moss that strive                 235
          To drag it to the ground;
          And this I know, full many a time,
          When she was on the mountain high,
          By day, and in the silent night,
          When all the stars shone clear and bright,           240
          That I have heard her cry,
          'Oh misery! oh misery!
          Oh woe is me! oh misery!'"


       *       *       *       *       *


Compare 'The Heart of Midlothian' (vol. iii. chap. v. edition of 1818):

  "Are ye sure ye ken the way ye are taking us?" said Jeanie, who began
  to imagine that she was getting deeper into the woods, and more remote
  from the highroad.

  "Do I ken the road? Wasna I mony a day living here, and what for
  shouldna I ken the road? I might hae forgotten, too, for it was afore
  my accident; but there are some things ane can never forget, let them
  try it as muckle as they like."

  By this time they had gained the deepest part of a patch of woodland.
  The trees were a little separated from each other, and at the foot of
  one of them, a beautiful poplar, was a hillock of moss, such as the
  poet of Grasmere has described in the motto to our chapter. So soon as
  she arrived at this spot, Madge Wildfire, joining her hands above her
  head, with a loud scream that resembled laughter, flung herself all at
  once upon the spot, and remained there lying motionless.

  Jeanie's first idea was to take the opportunity of flight; but her
  desire to escape yielded for a moment to apprehension for the poor
  insane being, who, she thought, might perish for want of relief. With
  an effort, which, in her circumstances, might be termed heroic, she
  stooped down, spoke in a soothing tone, and tried to raise up the
  forlorn creature. She effected this with difficulty, and as she placed
  her against the tree in a sitting posture, she observed with surprise,
  that her complexion, usually florid, was now deadly pale, and that her
  face was bathed in tears. Notwithstanding her own extreme danger,
  Jeanie was affected by the situation of her companion; and the rather
  that, through the whole train of her wavering and inconsistent state
  of mind and line of conduct, she discerned a general colour of
  kindness towards herself, for which she felt gratitude.

  "Let me alane!--let me alane!" said the poor young woman, as her
  paroxysm of sorrow began to abate. "Let me alane; it does me good to
  weep. I canna shed tears but maybe anes or twice a-year, and I aye
  come to wet this turf with them, that the flowers may grow fair, and
  the grass may be green."

  "But what is the matter with you?" said Jeanie. "Why do you weep so
  bitterly?"

  "There's matter enow," replied the lunatic; "mair than ae puir mind
  can bear, I trow. Stay a bit, and I'll tell you a' about it; for I
  like ye, Jeanie Deans; a'body spoke weel about ye when we lived in the
  Pleasaunts. And I mind aye the drink o' milk ye gae me yon day, when I
  had been on Arthur's Seat for four-and-twenty hours, looking for the
  ship that somebody was sailing in."

Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

    ... thorny ...    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

    ... it is overgrown.    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

    ... were ...    1798.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

    ... had ...    1798.]


[Variant 5:

1820.

    I've measured it from side to side:
    'Tis three feet long [i] and two feet wide.    1798.]


[Variant 6:


1827.

    That's like ...    1798.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

    But if you'd ...    1798.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

    The heap that's like ...    1798.]


[Variant 9: In the editions 1798 to 1815.

          Nay rack your brain--'tis all in vain,
          I'll tell you every thing I know;
          But to the thorn, and to the pond
          Which is a little step beyond,
          I wish that you would go:
          Perhaps when you are at the place
          You something of her tale may trace.


 XI       I'll give you the best help I can:
          Before you up the mountain go,
          Up to the dreary mountain-top,
          I'll tell you all I know.]


[Variant 10:

1845.

    'Tis now some two and twenty years,          1798.

    'Tis known, that twenty years are passed     1820.]


[Variant 11:

1820.

    And she was happy, happy still
    Whene'er she thought of Stephen Hill.    1798.]


[Variant 12:

1815.

    ... on that woful day
    A cruel, cruel fire, they say,
    Into her bones was sent:
    It dried her body like a cinder,
    And almost turn'd her brain to tinder.    1798.]


[Variant 13:

1836.

    'Tis said, a child was in her womb,
    As now to any eye was plain;    1798.

    'Tis said, her lamentable state
    Even to a careless eye was plain;    1820.

    Alas! her lamentable state    1827.]


[Variant 14:

1836.

    ... she was...    1798.]


[Variant 15:

1820.

    Oh me! ten thousand times I'd rather
    That he had died, that cruel father!    1798.]


[Variant 16:

1820.

    Last Christmas when we talked of this,
    Old Farmer Simpson did maintain,
    That in her womb the infant wrought    1798.]



[Variant 17:

1827.

    No more I know, I wish I did,
    And I would tell it all to you;    1798.]


[Variant 18:

1827.

    There's none that ever knew:    1798.]


[Variant 19:

1827.

    And if a child was born or no,
    There's no one that could ever tell;    1798.]


[Variant 20:

1827.

    There's no one knows, as I have said,    1798.]


[Variant 21:

1827.

    ... I've described ...    1798.]


[Variant 22:

1845.

    ... in faith, ...    1798.]


[Variant 23:

1798.

    In truth, it was ...    1800.

The edition of 1815 returns to the text of 1798.]


[Variant 24:

1827.

    ... and what's the pond?
    And what's the hill of moss to her?
    And what's the ...    1798.]


[Variant 25:

1800.

    I've heard the scarlet moss is red    1798.]


[Variant 26:

1845.

    But then the beauteous hill of moss    1798.

    It might not be--the Hill of moss      1827.

    But then the beauteous Hill of moss    1832.
    (Returning to the text of 1798.)

    But then the speckled hill of moss     1836.]


[Variant 27:

1827.

    But ...    1798.]


[Variant 28:

1845.

    ... is buried ...    1798.]


       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A:

  "March 19, 1798. William and Basil and I walked to the hill tops. A
  very cold bleak day. William wrote some lines describing a stunted
  Thorn" (Dorothy Wordsworth's Alfoxden Journal).--Ed.

  "April 20. Walked in the evening up the hill dividing the coombes.
  Came home the Crookham way, by the Thorn, and the little muddy pond"
  (Dorothy Wordsworth's Alfoxden Journal).--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE VARIANT

[Sub-Footnote i: Compare in Burger's 'Pfarrer's Tochter', "drei Spannen
lang," and see Appendix V.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





GOODY BLAKE AND HARRY GILL

A TRUE STORY


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [Written at Alfoxden. The incident from Dr. Darwin's 'Zoonomia'.--I.
  F.]

See Erasmus Darwin's 'Zoonomia', vol. iv. pp. 68-69, ed. 1801. It is the
story of a man named Tullis, narrated by an Italian, Signer L. Storgosi,
in a work called 'Il Narratore Italiano'.

  "I received good information of the truth of the following case, which
  was published a few years ago in the newspapers. A young farmer in
  Warwickshire, finding his hedges broke, and the sticks carried away
  during a frosty season, determined to watch for the thief. He lay many
  cold hours under a haystack, and at length an old woman, like a witch
  in a play, approached, and began to pull up the hedge; he waited till
  she had tied up her bundle of sticks, and was carrying them off, that
  he might convict her of the theft, and then springing from his
  concealment, he seized his prey with violent threats. After some
  altercation, in which her load was left upon the ground, she kneeled
  upon her bundle of sticks, and raising her arms to Heaven, beneath the
  bright moon then at the full, spoke to the farmer, already shivering
  with cold, 'Heaven grant that thou mayest never know again the
  blessing to be warm.' He complained of cold all the next day, and wore
  an upper coat, and in a few days another, and in a fortnight took to
  his bed, always saying nothing made him warm; he covered himself with
  many blankets, and had a sieve over his face as he lay; and from this
  one insane idea he kept his bed above twenty years for fear of the
  cold air, till at length he died."

In the "Advertisement" to the first edition of "Lyrical Ballads,"
Wordsworth says, "The tale of 'Goody Blake and Harry Gill' is founded on
a well-authenticated fact which happened in Warwickshire."

The following curious letter appeared in the 'Ipswich Magazine' of April
1799:

  "IPSWICH, April 2, 1799.

  "To the Editors of the 'Ipswich Magazine'.

  "GENTLEMEN--The scarcity of Coal at this time, and the piercing cold
  of the weather, cannot fail to be some apology for the depredations
  daily committed on the hedges in the neighbourhood. If ever it be
  permitted, it ought in the present season. Should there be any Farmer
  more rigorous than the rest, let him attend to the poetical story
  inserted in page 118 of this Magazine, and tremble at the fate of
  Farmer Gill, who was about to prosecute a poor old woman for a similar
  offence. The thing is a fact, and told by one of the first physicians
  of the present day, as having happened in the south of England, 'and
  which has, a short time since', been turned by a _lyric poet_ into
  that excellent ballad."

From 1815 to 1843, this poem was classed among those of "the
Imagination." In 1845 it was transferred to the list of "Miscellaneous
Poems."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  Oh! what's the matter? what's the matter?
  What is't that ails young Harry Gill?
  That evermore his teeth they chatter,
  Chatter, chatter, chatter still!
  Of waistcoats Harry has no lack,                               5
  Good duffle grey, and flannel fine;
  He has a blanket on his back,
  And coats enough to smother nine.

  In March, December, and in July,
  'Tis all the same with Harry Gill;                            10
  The neighbours tell, and tell you truly,
  His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
  At night, at morning, and at noon,
  'Tis all the same with Harry Gill;
  Beneath the sun, beneath the moon,                            15
  His teeth they chatter, chatter still!

  Young Harry was a lusty drover,
  And who so stout of limb as he?
  His cheeks were red as ruddy clover;
  His voice was like the voice of three.                        20
  Old [1] Goody Blake was old and poor;
  Ill fed she was, and thinly clad;
  And any man who passed her door
  Might see how poor a hut she had.

  All day she spun in her poor dwelling:                        25
  And then her three hours' work at night,
  Alas! 'twas hardly worth the telling,
  It would not pay for candle-light.
  Remote from sheltered village-green,
  On a hill's northern side she dwelt,                          30
  Where from sea-blasts the hawthorns lean,
  And hoary dews are slow to melt. [2]

  By the same fire to boil their pottage,
  Two poor old Dames, as I have known,
  Will often live in one small cottage;                         35
  But she, poor Woman! housed [3] alone.
  'Twas well enough when summer came,
  The long, warm, lightsome summer-day,
  Then at her door the _canty_ Dame
  Would sit, as any linnet, gay.                                40

  But when the ice our streams did fetter,
  Oh then how her old bones would shake;
  You would have said, if you had met her,
  'Twas a hard time for Goody Blake.
  Her evenings then were dull and dead:                         45
  Sad case it was, as you may think,
  For very cold to go to bed;
  And then for cold not sleep a wink.

  O joy for her! whene'er in winter
  The winds at night had made a rout;                           50
  And scattered many a lusty splinter
  And many a rotten bough about.
  Yet never had she, well or sick,
  As every man who knew her says,
  A pile beforehand, turf [4] or stick,                         55
  Enough to warm her for three days.

  Now, when the frost was past enduring,
  And made her poor old bones to ache,
  Could anything be more alluring
  Than an old hedge to Goody Blake?                             60
  And, now and then, it must be said,
  When her old bones were cold and chill,
  She left her fire, or left her bed,
  To seek the hedge of Harry Gill.

  Now Harry he had long suspected                               65
  This trespass of old Goody Blake;
  And vowed that she should be detected--
  That [5] he on her would vengeance take.
  And oft from his warm fire he'd go,
  And to the fields his road would take;                        70
  And there, at night, in frost and snow,
  He watched to seize old Goody Blake.

  And once, behind a rick of barley,
  Thus looking out did Harry stand:
  The moon was full and shining clearly,                        75
  And crisp with frost the stubble land.
 --He hears a noise--he's all awake--
  Again?--on tip-toe down the hill
  He softly creeps--'tis Goody Blake;
  She's at the hedge of Harry Gill!                             80

  Right glad was he when he beheld her:
  Stick after stick did Goody pull:
  He stood behind a bush of elder,
  Till she had filled her apron full.
  When with her load she turned about,                          85
  The by-way [6] back again to take;
  He started forward, with a shout,
  And sprang upon poor Goody Blake.

  And fiercely by the arm he took her,
  And by the arm he held her fast,                              90
  And fiercely by the arm he shook her,
  And cried, "I've caught you then at last!"
  Then Goody, who had nothing said,
  Her bundle from her lap let fall;
  And, kneeling on the sticks, she prayed                       95
  To God that is the judge of all.

  She prayed, her withered hand uprearing,
  While Harry held her by the arm--
  "God! who art never out of hearing,
  O may he never more be warm!"                                100
  The cold, cold moon above her head,
  Thus on her knees did Goody pray;
  Young Harry heard what she had said:
  And icy cold he turned away.

  He went complaining all the morrow                           105
  That he was cold and very chill:
  His face was gloom, his heart was sorrow,
  Alas! that day for Harry Gill!
  That day he wore a riding-coat,
  But not a whit the warmer he:                                110
  Another was on Thursday brought,
  And ere the Sabbath he had three.

  'Twas all in vain, a useless matter,
  And blankets were about him pinned;
  Yet still his jaws and teeth they clatter,                   115
  Like a loose casement in the wind.
  And Harry's flesh it fell away;
  And all who see him say, 'tis plain
  That, live as long as live he may,
  He never will be warm again.                                 120

  No word to any man he utters,
  A-bed or up, to young or old;
  But ever to himself he mutters,
  "Poor Harry Gill is very cold."
  A-bed or up, by night or day;                                125
  His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
  Now think, ye farmers all, I pray,
  Of Goody Blake and Harry Gill! [A]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1802.

    Auld    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1836

   --This woman dwelt in Dorsetshire,
    Her hut was on a cold hill-side,
    And in that country coals are dear,
    For they come far by wind and tide.       1798.

    Remote from sheltering village green,
    Upon a bleak hill-side, she dwelt,
    Where from sea-blasts the hawthorns lean,
    And hoary dews are slow to melt.          1820.

    On a hill's northern side she dwelt.      1827.]


[Variant 3.

1820.

    ... dwelt ...           1798.]


[Variant 4.

1827.

    ... wood ...             1798]


[Variant 5.

1836.

    And ...                  1798.]


[Variant 6.

1827.

    The bye-road ...         1798.]


       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare the many entries about "gathering sticks" in the
Alfoxden woods, in Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





HER EYES ARE WILD


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [Written at Alfoxden. The subject was reported to me by a lady of
  Bristol, who had seen the poor creature.--I. F.]

From 1798 to 1805 this poem was published under the title of 'The Mad
Mother'.

In the editions of 1815 and 1820 it was ranked as one of the "Poems
founded on the Affections." In the editions of 1827 and 1832, it was
classed as one of the "Poems of the Imagination." In 1836 and
afterwards, it was replaced among the "Poems founded on the
Affections."--Ed.


I           Her eyes are wild, her head is bare,
            The sun has burnt her coal-black hair;
            Her eyebrows have a rusty stain,
            And she came far from over the main.
            She has a baby on her arm,                             5
            Or else she were alone:
            And underneath the hay-stack warm,
            And on the greenwood stone,
            She talked and sung the woods among,
            And it was in the English tongue.                     10


II          "Sweet babe! they say that I am mad
            But nay, my heart is far too glad;
            And I am happy when I sing
            Full many a sad and doleful thing:
            Then, lovely baby, do not fear!                       15
            I pray thee have no fear of me;
            But safe as in a cradle, here
            My lovely baby! thou shalt be:
            To thee I know too much I owe;
            I cannot work thee any woe.                           20


III         "A fire was once within my brain;
            And in my head a dull, dull pain;
            And fiendish faces, one, two, three,
            Hung at my breast, [1] and pulled at me;
            But then there came a sight of joy;                   25
            It came at once to do me good;
            I waked, and saw my little boy,
            My little boy of flesh and blood;
            Oh joy for me that sight to see!
            For he was here, and only he.                         30


IV          "Suck, little babe, oh suck again!
            It cools my blood; it cools my brain;
            Thy lips I feel them, baby! they
            Draw from my heart the pain away.
            Oh! press me with thy little hand;                    35
            It loosens something at my chest;
            About that tight and deadly band
            I feel thy little fingers prest.
            The breeze I see is in the tree:
            It comes to cool my babe and me.                      40


V           "Oh! love me, love me, little boy!
            Thou art thy mother's only joy;
            And do not dread the waves below,
            When o'er the sea-rock's edge we go;
            The high crag cannot work me harm,                    45
            Nor leaping torrents when they howl;
            The babe I carry on my arm,
            He saves for me my precious soul;
            Then happy lie; for blest am I;
            Without me my sweet babe would die.                   50


VI          "Then do not fear, my boy! for thee
            Bold as a lion will I be; [2]
            And I will always be thy guide,
            Through hollow snows and rivers wide.
            I'll build an Indian bower; I know                    55
            The leaves that make the softest bed:
            And, if from me thou wilt not go,
            But still be true till I am dead,
            My pretty thing! then thou shall sing
            As merry as the birds in spring.                      60


VII         "Thy father cares not for my breast,
            'Tis thine, sweet baby, there to rest;
            'Tis all thine own!--and, if its hue
            Be changed, that was so fair to view,
            'Tis fair enough for thee, my dove!                   65
            My beauty, little child, is flown,
            But thou wilt live with me in love;
            And what if my poor cheek be brown?
            'Tis well for me, thou canst not see
            How pale and wan it else would be.                    70


VIII        "Dread not their taunts, my little Life;
            I am thy father's wedded wife;
            And underneath the spreading tree
            We two will live in honesty.
            If his sweet boy he could forsake,                    75
            With me he never would have stayed:
            From him no harm my babe can take;
            But he, poor man! is wretched made;
            And every day we two will pray
            For him that's gone and far away.                     80


IX          "I'll teach my boy the sweetest things:
            I'll teach him how the owlet sings.
            My little babe! thy lips are still,
            And thou hast almost sucked thy fill.
           --Where art thou gone, my own dear child?             85
            What wicked looks are those I see?
            Alas! alas! that look so wild,
            It never, never came from me:
            If thou art mad, my pretty lad,
            Then I must be for ever sad.                          90


X           "Oh! smile on me, my little lamb!
            For I thy own dear mother am:
            My love for thee has well been tried:
            I've sought thy father far and wide.
            I know the poisons of the shade;                      95
            I know the earth-nuts fit for food:
            Then, pretty dear, be not afraid:
            We'll find thy father in the wood.
            Now laugh and be gay, to the woods away!
            And there, my babe, we'll live for aye." [A]         100


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1.

1820.

    ... breasts ...      1798.]


[Variant 2.

1832.

    ... I will be;       1798.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A:

  "For myself, I would rather have written 'The Mad Mother' than all the
  works of all the Bolingbrokes and Sheridans, those brilliant meteors,
  that have been exhaled from the morasses of human depravity since the
  loss of Paradise."

(S. T. C. to W. Godwin, 9th December 1800.) See 'William Godwin: his
Friends and Contemporaries', vol. ii. p. 14.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





SIMON LEE, THE OLD HUNTSMAN;

WITH AN INCIDENT IN WHICH HE WAS CONCERNED


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [This old man had been huntsman to the Squires of Alfoxden, which, at
  the time we occupied it, belonged to a minor. The old man's cottage
  stood upon the Common, a little way from the entrance to Alfoxden
  Park. But it had disappeared. Many other changes had taken place in
  the adjoining village, which I could not but notice with a regret more
  natural than well-considered. Improvements but rarely appear such to
  those who, after long intervals of time, revisit places they have had
  much pleasure in. It is unnecessary to add, the fact was as mentioned
  in the poem; and I have, after an interval of forty-five years, the
  image of the old man as fresh before my eyes as if I had seen him
  yesterday. The expression when the hounds were out, 'I dearly love
  their voice,' was word for word from his own lips.--I. F.]

This poem was classed among those of "Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  In the sweet shire of Cardigan,
  Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall,
  An old Man dwells, a little man,--
  'Tis said [1] he once was tall.
  [2] Full five-and-thirty [3] years he lived                      5
  A running huntsman merry;
  And still the centre of his cheek
  Is red as a ripe cherry. [4]

  No man like him the horn could sound,
  And hill and valley rang with glee:                             10
  When Echo bandied, round and round,
  The halloo of Simon Lee.
  In those proud days, he little cared
  For husbandry or tillage;
  To blither tasks did Simon rouse                                15
  The sleepers of the village. [5]

  He all the country could outrun,
  Could leave both man and horse behind;
  And often, ere the chase [6] was done,
  He reeled, and was stone blind.                                 20
  And still there's something in the world
  At which his heart rejoices;
  For when the chiming hounds are out,
  He dearly loves their voices!

  But, oh the heavy change! [A]--bereft                           25
  Of health, strength, friends, and kindred, see! [7]
  Old Simon to the world is left
  In liveried poverty.
  His Master's dead,--and no one now
  Dwells in the Hall of Ivor;                                     30
  Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead;
  He is the sole survivor. [8]

  And [9] he is lean and he is sick;
  His body, dwindled and awry,
  Rests upon ankles swoln and thick;                              35
  His legs are thin and dry.
  One prop he has, and only one,
  His wife, an aged woman,
  Lives with him, near the waterfall,
  Upon the village Common. [10]                                   40

  Beside their moss-grown hut of clay,
  Not twenty paces from the door,
  A scrap of land they have, but they
  Are poorest of the poor.
  This scrap of land he from the heath                            45
  Enclosed when he was stronger;
  But what to them avails the land
  Which he can till no longer? [11]

  Oft, working by her Husband's side,
  Ruth does what Simon cannot do;                                 50
  For she, with scanty cause for pride, [12]
  Is stouter of the two.
  And, though you with your utmost skill
  From labour could not wean them,
  'Tis little, very little--all                                   55
  That they can do between them. [13]

  Few months of life has he in store
  As he to you will tell,
  For still, the more he works, the more
  Do his weak ankles swell. [14]                                  60
  My gentle Reader, I perceive
  How patiently you've waited,
  And now I fear [15] that you expect
  Some tale will be related.

  O Reader! had you in your mind                                  65
  Such stores as silent thought can bring,[B]
  O gentle Reader! you would find
  A tale in every thing.
  What more I have to say is short,
  And you must [16] kindly take it:                               70
  It is no tale; but, should you think, [17]
  Perhaps a tale you'll make it.

  One summer-day I chanced to see
  This old Man doing all he could
  To unearth the root [18] of an old tree,                        75
  A stump of rotten wood.
  The mattock tottered in his hand;
  So vain was his endeavour,
  That at the root of the old tree
  He might have worked for ever.                                  80

  "You're overtasked, good Simon Lee,
  Give me your tool," to him I said;
  And at the word right gladly he
  Received my proffered aid.
  I struck, and with a single blow                                85
  The tangled root I severed,
  At which the poor old Man so long
  And vainly had endeavoured.

  The tears into his eyes were brought,
  And thanks and praises seemed to run                            90
  So fast out of his heart, I thought
  They never would have done.
 --I've heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
  With coldness still returning;
  Alas! the gratitude of men                                      95
  Hath oftener [19] left me mourning.[C]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

    I've heard ...    1798.]


[Variant 2: In editions 1798 to 1815 the following is inserted:

    Of years he has upon his back,
    No doubt, a burthen weighty;
    He says he is three score and ten,
    But others say he's eighty.

    A long blue livery-coat has he,
    That's fair behind, and fair before;
    Yet, meet him where you will, you see
    At once that he is poor.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

    ... five and twenty ...    1798.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

    And, though he has but one eye left,
    His cheek is like a cherry.           1798.

    And still the centre of his cheek
    Is blooming as a cherry.              1820.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

    No man like him the horn could sound,
    And no man was so full of glee;
    To say the least, four counties round
    Had heard of Simon Lee;
    His master's dead, and no one now
    Dwells in the hall of Ivor;
    Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead;
    He is the sole survivor.              1798.

    Worn out by hunting feats--bereft
    By time of friends and kindred, see!
    Old Simon to the world is left
    In liveried poverty.
    His Master's dead, ...                1827.

The fourth stanza of the final edition being second in 1827, and the
second stanza being third in 1827.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

    ... race ...    1798.]


[Variant 7:

    Of strength, of friends, and kindred, see.

In MS. letter to Allan Cunningham, Nov. 1828.]


[Variant 8:

1832.

    His hunting feats have him bereft
    Of his right eye, as you may see:
    And then, what limbs those feats have left
    To poor old Simon Lee!
    He has no son, he has no child,
    His wife, an aged woman,
    Lives with him, near the waterfall,
    Upon the village common.                  1798.

    His hunting feats have him bereft
    Of his right eye, as you may see,
    And Simon to the world is left,
    In liveried poverty.
    When he was young he little knew
    Of husbandry or tillage;
    And now is forced to work, though weak,
   --The weakest in the village.            1820.]


[Variant 9:

1798.

    But ...    1820.

The text of 1832 reverts to that of 1798.]


[Variant 10:

1827.

    His little body's half awry,
    His ancles they are swoln and thick;
    His legs are thin and dry.
    When he was young he little knew
    Of husbandry or tillage;
    And now he's forced to work, though weak,
   --The weakest in the village.             1798.

    His dwindled body's half awry,            1800.

    His ancles, too, are swoln and thick;     1815.

    And now is forced to work,                1815.

    His dwindled body half awry,
    Rests upon ancles swoln and thick;
    His legs are thin and dry.
    He has no son, he has no child,
    His Wife, an aged woman,
    Lives with him, near the waterfall,
    Upon the village Common.                  1820.]


[Variant 11:

1845.

    But what avails the land to them,
    Which they can till no longer?            1798.

    "But what," saith he, "avails the land,
    Which I can till no longer?"              1827.

    But what avails it now, the land
    Which he can till no longer?              1832.

    'Tis his, but what avails the land
    Which he can till no longer?              1837.

    The time, alas! is come when he
    Can till the land no longer.              1840.

    The time is also come when he
    Can till the land no longer.                 C.]


[Variant 12:

1827.

    Old Ruth works out of doors with him,
    And does what Simon cannot do;
    For she, not over stout of limb,    1798.]


[Variant 13:

1840.

    Alas! 'tis very little, all
    Which they can ...           1798.

    That they can ...            1837.]


[Variant 14:

1815.

    His poor old ancles swell.    1798.]


[Variant 15:

1820.

    And I'm afraid ...    1798.]


[Variant 16:

1820.

    I hope you'll ...    1798.]


[Variant 17:

1798.

    ... _think_,

In the editions 1832 to 1843.]


[Variant 18:

1815.

    About the root ...    1798.]


[Variant 19:

1820.

    Has oftner ...     1798.

    Has oftener ...    1805.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Note that the phrase: 'But oh the heavy change,' occurs in
Milton's 'Lycidas'. (Professor Dowden.) See 'Lycidas', l. 37.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Shakspeare's Sonnet, No. xxx.:

  When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
  I summon up remembrance of things past;

and in Spenser's 'An epitaph upon the Right Honourable Sir Phillip
Sidney, Knight; Lord governor of Flushing.'

  Farewell, self-pleasing thoughts, which quietness brings forth.

Ed.]


[Footnote C: See Appendix VI. to this volume.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





LINES WRITTEN IN EARLY SPRING


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [Actually composed while I was sitting by the side of the brook that
  runs down from the 'Comb', in which stands the village of Alford,
  through the grounds of Alfoxden. It was a chosen resort of mine. The
  brook ran down a sloping rock, so as to make a waterfall, considerable
  for that county; and across the pool below had fallen a tree--an ash
  if I rightly remember--from which rose perpendicularly, boughs in
  search of the light intercepted by the deep shade above. The boughs
  bore leaves of green, that for want of sunshine had faded into almost
  lily-white; and from the underside of this natural sylvan bridge
  depended long and beautiful tresses of ivy, which waved gently in the
  breeze, that might, poetically speaking, be called the breath of the
  waterfall. This motion varied of course in proportion to the power of
  water in the brook. When, with dear friends, I revisited this spot,
  after an interval of more than forty years, [A] this interesting
  feature of the scene was gone. To the owner of the place I could not
  but regret that the beauty of this retired part of the grounds had not
  tempted him to make it more accessible by a path, not broad or
  obtrusive, but sufficient for persons who love such scenes to creep
  along without difficulty.--I. F.]


These 'Lines' were included among the "Poems of Sentiment
and Reflection."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  I heard a thousand blended notes,
  While in a grove I sate reclined,
  In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts
  Bring sad thoughts to the mind.

  To her fair works did Nature link                                 5
  The human soul that through me ran;
  And much it grieved my heart to think
  What man has made of man.

  Through primrose tufts, in that green [1] bower,
  The periwinkle trailed its wreaths;                              10
  And 'tis my faith that every flower
  Enjoys the air it breathes. [B]

  The birds around me hopped and played,
  Their thoughts I cannot measure:--
  But the least motion which they made,                            15
  It seemed a thrill of pleasure.

  The budding twigs spread out their fan,
  To catch the breezy air;
  And I must think, do all I can,
  That there was pleasure there.                                   20

  If this belief from heaven be sent,
  If such be Nature's holy plan, [2]
  Have I not reason to lament
  What man has made of man?


       *       *       *       *       *


This Alfoxden dell, once known locally as "The Mare's Pool," was a
trysting-place of Wordsworth, Coleridge, and their friends. Coleridge
thus describes it, in his poem beginning "This Lime-Tree Bower, my
Prison," addressed to Charles Lamb:

  The roaring dell, o'er-wooded, narrow, deep,
  And only speckled by the midday sun;
  Where its slim trunk the ash from rock to rock
  Flings arching like a bridge;--that branchless ash,
  Unsunn'd and damp, whose few poor yellow leaves
  Ne'er tremble in the gale, yet tremble still,
  Fanned by the waterfall!

Of all the localities around Alfoxden, this grove is the one chiefly
associated with Wordsworth. There was no path to the waterfall, as
suggested by the Poet to the owner of the place, in 1840; but, in 1880,
I found the "natural sylvan bridge" restored. An ash tree, having fallen
across the glen, reproduced the scene exactly as it is described in the
Fenwick note.--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

    ... sweet    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

    If I these thoughts may not prevent,
    If such be of my creed the plan,        1798.

    If this belief from Heaven is sent,
    If such be nature's holy plan,          1820.

    From Heaven if this belief be sent,     1827.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See the Fenwick note to "A whirl-blast from behind the
hill," p. 238.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: See Appendix VII.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TO MY SISTER


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [Composed in front of Alfoxden House. My little boy-messenger on this
  occasion was the son of Basil Montagu. The larch mentioned in the
  first stanza was standing when I revisited the place in May 1841, more
  than forty years after. I was disappointed that it had not improved in
  appearance as to size, nor had it acquired anything of the majesty of
  age, which, even though less perhaps than any other tree, the larch
  sometimes does. A few score yards from this tree, grew, when we
  inhabited Alfoxden, one of the most remarkable beech-trees ever seen.
  The ground sloped both towards and from it. It was of immense size,
  and threw out arms that struck into the soil, like those of the
  banyan-tree, and rose again from it. Two of the branches thus inserted
  themselves twice, which gave to each the appearance of a serpent
  moving along by gathering itself up in folds. One of the large boughs
  of this tree had been torn off by the wind before we left Alfoxden,
  but five remained. In 1841 we could barely find the spot where the
  tree had stood. So remarkable a production of nature could not have
  been wilfully destroyed.--I. F.]

In the editions 1798 to 1815 the title of this poem was, 'Lines written
at a small distance from my House, and sent by my little Boy to the
person to whom they are addressed'. From 1820 to 1843 the title was, 'To
my Sister; written at a small distance from my House, and sent by my
little Boy'. In 1845 and afterwards, it was simply 'To my Sister'. The
poem was placed by Wordsworth among those of "Sentiment and
Reflection."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  It is the first mild day of March:
  Each minute sweeter than before
  The redbreast sings from the tall larch
  That stands beside our door.

  There is a blessing in the air,                                   5
  Which seems a sense of joy to yield
  To the bare trees, and mountains bare,
  And grass in the green field.

  My sister! ('tis a wish of mine)
  Now that our morning meal is done,                               10
  Make haste, your morning task resign;
  Come forth and feel the sun.

  Edward will come with you;--and, pray,
  Put on with speed your woodland dress;
  And bring no book: for this one day                              15
  We'll give to idleness.

  No joyless forms shall regulate
  Our living calendar:
  We from to-day, my Friend, will date
  The opening of the year.                                         20

  Love, now a [1] universal birth,
  From heart to heart is stealing,
  From earth to man, from man to earth:
 --It is the hour of feeling.

  One moment now may give us more                                  25
  Than years of toiling reason: [2]
  Our minds shall drink at every pore
  The spirit of the season.

  Some silent laws our hearts will make, [3]
  Which they shall long obey:                                      30
  We for the year to come may take
  Our temper from to-day.

  And from the blessed power that rolls
  About, below, above,
  We'll frame the measure of our souls:                            35
  They shall be tuned to love.

  Then come, my Sister! come, I pray,
  With speed put on your woodland dress;
  And bring no book: for this one day
  We'll give to idleness.                                          40


       *       *       *       *       *


The larch is now gone; but the place where it stood can easily be
identified.--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

    ... an ...    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

    Than fifty years of reason;    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1820.

    ... may.                       1798.]





       *       *       *       *       *





EXPOSTULATION AND REPLY


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [This poem is a favourite among the Quakers, as I have learned on many
  occasions. It was composed in front of the house of Alfoxden, in the
  spring of 1798. [A]--I.F.]

Included among the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  "Why, William, on that old grey stone,
  Thus for the length of half a day,
  Why, William, sit you thus alone,
  And dream your time away?

  "Where are your books?--that light bequeathed                     5
  To Beings else forlorn and blind!
  Up! up! and drink the spirit breathed
  From dead men to their kind.

  "You look round on your Mother Earth,
  As if she for no purpose bore you;                               10
  As if you were her first-born birth,
  And none had lived before you!"

  One morning thus, by Esthwaite lake,
  When life was sweet, I knew not why,
  To me my good friend Matthew spake,                              15
  And thus I made reply.

  "The eye--it cannot choose but see;
  We cannot bid the ear be still;
  Our bodies feel, where'er they be,
  Against or with our will.                                        20

  "Nor less I deem that there are Powers
  Which of themselves our minds impress;
  That we can feed this mind of ours
  In a wise passiveness.

  "Think you, 'mid all this mighty sum                             25
  Of things for ever speaking,
  That nothing of itself will come,
  But we must still be seeking?

  "--Then ask not wherefore, here, alone,
  Conversing as I may,                                             30
  I sit upon this old grey stone,
  And dream my time away."


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In his "Advertisement" to the first edition of "Lyrical
Ballads" (1798) Wordsworth writes,

  "The lines entitled 'Expostulation and Reply', and those which follow,
  arose out of conversation with a friend who was somewhat unreasonably
  attached to modern books of Moral Philosophy."

Was the friend Sir James Mackintosh? or was it--a much more probable
supposition--his friend, S. T. Coleridge?--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE TABLES TURNED

AN EVENING SCENE ON THE SAME SUBJECT


Composed 1798.--Published 1798


Included among the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  Up! up! my Friend, and quit your books;
  Or surely you'll grow double:
  Up! up! my Friend, and clear your looks;
  Why all this toil and trouble? [1]

  The sun, above the mountain's head,                           5
  A freshening lustre mellow
  Through all the long green fields has spread,
  His first sweet evening yellow.

  Books! 'tis a dull and endless strife:
  Come, hear the woodland linnet,                              10
  How sweet his music! on my life,
  There's more of wisdom in it.

  And hark! how blithe the throstle sings!
  He, too, is [2] no mean preacher:
  Come forth into the light of things,                         15
  Let Nature be your Teacher.

  She has a world of ready wealth,
  Our minds and hearts to bless--
  Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health,
  Truth breathed by cheerfulness.                              20

  One impulse from a vernal wood
  May teach you more of man,
  Of moral evil and of good,
  Than all the sages can. [A]

  Sweet is the lore which Nature brings;                       25
  Our meddling intellect
  Mis-shapes the beauteous forms of things:--
  We murder to dissect.

  Enough of Science and of Art;
  Close up those [3] barren leaves;                            30
  Come forth, and bring with you a heart
  That watches and receives.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1820.

    Up! up! my friend, and clear your looks,
    Why all this toil and trouble?
    Up! up! my friend, and quit your books,
    Or surely you'll grow double.           1798.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

    And he is ...    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

    ... these ...    1798.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: A mediaeval anticipation of this may be quoted in a
footnote.

  "Believe me, as my own experience," once said St. Bernard, "you will
  find more in the woods than in books; the forests and rocks will teach
  you more than you can learn from the greatest Masters."

I quote this, as sent to me by a friend; but the only passage at all
approaching to it which I can verify is the following:

  "Quidquid in Scripturis valet, quidquid in eis spiritualiter sentit,
  maxime in silvis et in agris meditando et orando se confitetur
  accepisse, et in hoc nullos aliquando se magistros habuisse nisi
  quercus et fagos joco illo suo gratioso inter amicos dicere solet."

See the appendix to Mabillon's edition of 'Bernardi Opera', ii. 1072,
'S. Bernardi Vita, et Res Gesta, auctore Guilielmo'.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE COMPLAINT OF A FORSAKEN INDIAN WOMAN


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


When a Northern Indian, from sickness, is unable to continue his journey
with his companions; he is left behind, covered over with Deer-skins,
and is supplied with water, food, and fuel if the situation of the place
will afford it. He is informed of the track which his companions intend
to pursue, and if he is unable to follow, or overtake them, he perishes
alone in the Desart; unless he should have the good fortune to fall in
with some other Tribes of Indians. It is unnecessary to add that the
females are equally, or still more, exposed to the same fate. See that
very interesting work, Hearne's 'Journey from Hudson's Bay to the
Northern Ocean'. When the Northern Lights, as the same writer informs
us, vary their position in the air, they make a rustling and a crackling
noise. This circumstance is alluded to in the first stanza of the
following poem.--W. W. 1798.

  [At Alfoxden, in 1798, where I read Hearne's 'Journey' with deep
  interest. It was composed for the volume of "Lyrical Ballads."--I. F.]

Classed among the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


I           Before I see another day,
            Oh let my body die away!
            In sleep I heard the northern gleams;
            The stars, they were among my dreams; [1]
            In rustling conflict through the skies, [2]             5
            I heard, I saw the flashes drive, [3]
            And yet they are upon my eyes,
            And yet I am alive;
            Before I see another day,
            Oh let my body die away!                               10


II          My fire is dead: it knew no pain;
            Yet is it dead, and I remain:
            All stiff with ice the ashes lie;
            And they are dead, and I will die.
            When I was well, I wished to live,                     15
            For clothes, for warmth, for food, and fire
            But they to me no joy can give,
            No pleasure now, and no desire.
            Then here contented will I lie!
            Alone, I cannot fear to die.                           20


III         Alas! ye [4] might have dragged me on
            Another day, a single one!
            Too soon I yielded to despair;
            Why did ye listen to my prayer? [5]
            When ye [6] were gone my limbs were stronger;          25
            And oh, how grievously I rue,
            That, afterwards, a little longer,
            My friends, I did not follow you!
            For strong and without pain I lay,
            Dear friends, when ye [7] were gone away.              30


IV          My Child! they gave thee to another,
            A woman who was not thy mother.
            When from my arms my Babe they took,
            On me how strangely did he look!
            Through his whole body something ran,                  35
            A most strange working [8] did I see;
           --As if he strove to be a man,
            That he might pull the sledge for me:
            And then he stretched his arms, how wild!
            Oh mercy! like a helpless child. [9]                   40


V           My little joy! my little pride!
            In two days more I must have died.
            Then do not weep and grieve for me;
            I feel I must have died with thee.
            O wind, that o'er my head art flying                   45
            The way my friends their course did bend,
            I should not feel the pain of dying,
            Could I with thee a message send;
            Too soon, my friends, ye [10] went away;
            For I had many things to say.                          50

VI          I'll follow you across the snow;
            Ye [11] travel heavily and slow;
            In spite of all my weary pain
            I'll look upon your tents again.
           --My fire is dead, and snowy white                     55
            The water which beside it stood:
            The wolf has come to me to-night,
            And he has stolen away my food.
            For ever left alone am I;
            Then wherefore should I fear to die?                   60

VII [12]    Young as I am, my course is run, [13]
            I shall not see another sun;
            I cannot lift my limbs to know
            If they have any life or no.
            My poor forsaken Child, if I                           65
            For once could have thee close to me,
            With happy heart I then would die,
            And my last thought would happy be; [14]
            But thou, dear Babe, art far away,
            Nor shall I see another day. [15]                      70


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1798.

    The stars were mingled with my dreams;    1815.

The text of 1836 returns to that of 1798.]


[Variant 2:

1820.

    In sleep did I behold the skies,    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

    I saw the crackling flashes drive;     1798.

    I heard, and saw the flashes drive;    1820.]


[Variant 4:

1815.

    ... you ...    1798.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

    Too soon despair o'er me prevailed;
    Too soon my heartless spirit failed;    1798.]


[Variant 6:

1815.

    ... you ...    1798.]


[Variant 7:

1845.

    My friends, when you ...    1798.

    ... when ye ...    1815.]


[Variant 8:

1815.

    A most strange something ....    1798.]


[Variant 9:

1815.

    ... a little child.    1798.]


[Variant 10:

1815.

    ... you ...    1798.]


[Variant 11:

1815.

    You ...    1798.]


[Variant 12: This stanza was omitted in the editions 1815 to 1832, but
restored in 1836.--Ed.]


[Variant 13:

1836.

    My journey will be shortly run,    1798.]


[Variant 14:

1836.

    ... I then would die,
    And my last thoughts ...    1798.

    ... I then should die,      1800.]


[Variant 15:

1836.

    I feel my body die away,
    I shall not see another day.    1798.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE LAST OF THE FLOCK


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [Produced at the same time as 'The Complaint', and for the same
  purpose. The incident occurred in the village of Holford, close by
  Alfoxden.--I. F.]

Included among the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


I           In distant countries have I been, [1]
            And yet I have not often seen
            A healthy man, a man full grown,
            Weep in the public roads, alone.
            But such a one, on English ground,                    5
            And in the broad highway, I met;
            Along the broad highway he came,
            His cheeks with tears were wet:
            Sturdy he seemed, though he was sad;
            And in his arms a Lamb he had.                       10


II          He saw me, and he turned aside,
            As if he wished himself to hide:
            And with his coat did then essay [2]
            To wipe those briny tears away.
            I followed him, and said, "My friend,                15
            What ails you? wherefore weep you so?"
           --"Shame on me, Sir! this lusty Lamb,
            He makes my tears to flow.
            To-day I fetched him from the rock:
            He is the last of all my flock.                      20


III         "When I was young, a single man,
            And after youthful follies ran,
            Though little given to care and thought,
            Yet, so it was, an ewe [3] I bought;
            And other sheep from her I raised,                   25
            As healthy sheep as you might see;
            And then I married, and was rich
            As I could wish to be;
            Of sheep I numbered a full score,
            And every year increased my store.                   30


IV          "Year after year my stock it grew;
            And from this one, this single ewe,
            Full fifty comely sheep I raised,
            As fine [4] a flock as ever grazed!
            Upon the Quantock hills they fed; [5]                35
            They throve, and we at home did thrive:
           --This lusty Lamb of all my store
            Is all that is alive;
            And now I care not if we die,
            And perish all of poverty.                           40


V           "Six [6] Children, Sir! had I to feed;
            Hard labour in a time of need!
            My pride was tamed, and in our grief
            I of the Parish asked relief.
            They said, I was a wealthy man;                      45
            My sheep upon the uplands [7] fed,
            And it was fit that thence I took
            Whereof to buy us bread.
            'Do this: how can we give to you,'
            They cried, 'what to the poor is due?'               50


VI          "I sold a sheep, as they had said,
            And bought my little children bread,
            And they were healthy with their food;
            For me--it never did me good.
            A woeful time it was for me,                         55
            To see the end of all my gains,
            The pretty flock which I had reared
            With all my care and pains,
            To see it melt like snow away--
            For me it was a woeful day.                          60


VII         "Another still! and still another!
            A little lamb, and then its mother!
            It was a vein that never stopped--
            Like blood-drops from my heart they dropped.
            'Till thirty were not left alive                     65
            They dwindled, dwindled, one by one;
            And I may say, that many a time
            I wished they all were gone--
            Reckless of what might come at last
            Were but the bitter struggle past. [8]               70


VIII        "To wicked deeds I was inclined,
            And wicked fancies crossed my mind;
            And every man I chanced to see,
            I thought he knew some ill of me:
            No peace, no comfort could I find,                   75
            No ease, within doors or without;
            And, crazily and wearily
            I went my work about;
            And oft was moved to flee from home,
            And hide my head where wild beasts roam.[9]          80


IX          "Sir! 'twas a precious flock to me,
            As dear as my own children be;
            For daily with my growing store
            I loved my children more and more.
            Alas! it was an evil time;                           85
            God cursed me in my sore distress;
            I prayed, yet every day I thought
            I loved my children less;
            And every week, and every day,
            My flock it seemed to melt away.                     90


X           "They dwindled, Sir, sad sight to see!
            From ten to five, from five to three,
            A lamb, a wether, and a ewe;-.
            And then at last from three to two;
            And, of my fifty, yesterday                          95
            I had but only one:
            And here it lies upon my arm,
            Alas! and I have none;--
            To-day I fetched it from the rock;
            It is the last of all my flock."                    100


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

    ... I have been,    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

    Then with his coat he made essay    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1832.

    ... a ewe ...    1798.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

    As sweet ...    1798.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

    Upon the mountain did they feed;    1798.]


[Variant 6:

1800.

    Ten ...    1798.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

    ... upon the mountain ...    1798.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

    They dwindled one by one away;
    For me it was a woeful day.    1798.]


[Variant 9:

1836.

    Oft-times I thought to run away;
    For me it was a woeful day.    1798.

    Bent oftentimes to flee from home,
    And hide my head where wild beasts roam.    1827.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE IDIOT BOY


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [Alfoxden, 1798. The last stanza, 'The cocks did crow to-whoo,
  to-whoo, and the sun did shine so cold,' was the foundation of the
  whole. The words were reported to me by my dear friend Thomas Poole;
  but I have since heard the same repeated of other idiots. Let me add,
  that this long poem was composed in the groves of Alfoxden, almost
  extempore; not a word, I believe, being corrected, though one stanza
  was omitted. I mention this in gratitude to those happy moments, for,
  in truth, I never wrote anything with so much glee.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  'Tis eight o'clock,--a clear March night,
  The moon is up,--the sky is blue,
  The owlet, in the moonlight air,
  Shouts from [1] nobody knows where;
  He lengthens out his lonely shout,                              5
  Halloo! halloo! a long halloo!

 --Why bustle thus about your door,
  What means this bustle, Betty Foy?
  Why are you in this mighty fret?
  And why on horseback have you set                              10
  Him whom you love, your Idiot Boy?
  [2]

  Scarcely a soul is out of bed: [3]
  Good Betty, put him down again;
  His lips with joy they burr at you;
  But, Betty! what has he to do                                  15
  With stirrup, saddle, or with rein?
  [4]

  But Betty's bent on her intent;
  For her good neighbour, Susan Gale,
  Old Susan, she who dwells alone,
  Is sick, and makes a piteous moan,                             20
  As if her very life would fail.

  There's not a house within a mile,
  No hand to help them in distress;
  Old Susan lies a-bed in pain,
  And sorely puzzled are the twain,                              25
  For what she ails they cannot guess.

  And Betty's husband's at the wood,
  Where by the week he doth abide,
  A woodman in the distant vale;
  There's none to help poor Susan Gale;                          30
  What must be done? what will betide?

  And Betty from the lane has fetched
  Her Pony, that is mild and good;
  Whether he be in joy or pain,
  Feeding at will along the lane,                                35
  Or bringing faggots from the wood.

  And he is all in travelling trim,--
  And, by the moonlight, Betty Foy
  Has on the well-girt saddle set [5]
  (The like was never heard of yet)                              40
  Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy.

  And he must post without delay
  Across the bridge and through the dale, [6]
  And by the church, and o'er the down,
  To bring a Doctor from the town,                               45
  Or she will die, old Susan Gale.

  There is no need of boot or spur,
  There is no need of whip or wand;
  For Johnny has his holly-bough,
  And with a _hurly-burly_ now                                   50
  He shakes the green bough in his hand.

  And Betty o'er and o'er has told
  The Boy, who is her best delight,
  Both what to follow, what to shun,
  What do, and what to leave undone,                             55
  How turn to left, and how to right.

  And Betty's most especial charge,
  Was, "Johnny! Johnny! mind that you
  Come home again, nor stop at all,--
  Come home again, whate'er befal,                               60
  My Johnny, do, I pray you do."

  To this did Johnny answer make,
  Both with his head and with his hand,
  And proudly shook the bridle too;
  And then! his words were not a few,                            65
  Which Betty well could understand.

  And now that Johnny is just going,
  Though Betty's in a mighty flurry,
  She gently pats the Pony's side,
  On which her Idiot Boy must ride,                              70
  And seems no longer in a hurry.

  But when the Pony moved his legs,
  Oh! then for the poor Idiot Boy!
  For joy he cannot hold the bridle,
  For joy his head and heels are idle,                           75
  He's idle all for very joy.

  And while the Pony moves his legs,
  In Johnny's left hand you may see
  The green bough [7] motionless and dead:
  The Moon that shines above his head                            80
  Is not more still and mute than he.

  His heart it was so full of glee,
  That till full fifty yards were gone,
  He quite forgot his holly whip,
  And all his skill in horsemanship:                             85
  Oh! happy, happy, happy John.

  And while the Mother, at the door,
  Stands fixed, her face with joy o'erflows [8]
  Proud of herself, and proud of him,
  She sees him in his travelling trim,                           90
  How quietly her Johnny goes.

  The silence of her Idiot Boy,
  What hopes it sends to Betty's heart!
  He's at the guide-post--he turns right;
  She watches till he's out of sight,                            95
  And Betty will not then depart.

  Burr, burr--now Johnny's lips they burr.
  As loud as any mill, or near it;
  Meek as a lamb the Pony moves,
  And Johnny makes the noise he loves,                          100
  And Betty listens, glad to hear it.

  Away she hies to Susan Gale:
  Her Messenger's in merry tune; [9]
  The owlets hoot, the owlets curr,
  And Johnny's lips they burr, burr, burr,                      105
  As [10] on he goes beneath the moon.

  His steed and he right well agree;
  For of this Pony there's a rumour,
  That, should he lose his eyes and ears,
  And should he live a thousand years,                          110
  He never will be out of humour.

  But then he is a horse that thinks!
  And when he thinks, his pace is slack;
  Now, though he knows poor Johnny well,
  Yet, for his life, he cannot tell                             115
  What he has got upon his back.

  So through the moonlight lanes they go,
  And far into the moonlight dale,
  And by the church, and o'er the down,
  To bring a Doctor from the town,                              120
  To comfort poor old Susan Gale.

  And Betty, now at Susan's side,
  Is in the middle of her story,
  What speedy help her Boy will bring, [11]
  With many a most diverting thing,                             125
  Of Johnny's wit, and Johnny's glory.

  And Betty, still at Susan's side,
  By this time is not quite so flurried: [12]
  Demure with porringer and plate
  She sits, as if in Susan's fate                               130
  Her life and soul were buried.

  But Betty, poor good woman! she,
  You plainly in her face may read it,
  Could lend out of that moment's store
  Five years of happiness or more                               135
  To any that might need it.

  But yet I guess that now and then
  With Betty all was not so well;
  And to the road she turns her ears,
  And thence full many a sound she hears,                       140
  Which she to Susan will not tell.

  Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;
  "As sure as there's a moon in heaven,"
  Cries Betty, "he'll be back again;
  They'll both be here--'tis almost ten--                      145
  Both will be [13] here before eleven."

  Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;
  The clock gives warning for eleven;
  'Tis on the stroke--"He must be near,"
  Quoth Betty, "and will soon be here, [14]                     150
  As sure as there's a moon in heaven."

  The clock is on the stroke of twelve,
  And Johnny is not yet in sight:
 --The Moon's in heaven, as Betty sees,
  But Betty is not quite at ease;                               155
  And Susan has a dreadful night.

  And Betty, half an hour ago,
  On Johnny vile reflections cast:
  "A little idle sauntering Thing!"
  With other names, an endless string;                          160
  But now that time is gone and past.

  And Betty's drooping at the heart,
  That happy time all past and gone,
  "How can it be he is so late?
  The Doctor, he has made him wait;                             165
  Susan! they'll both be here anon."

  And Susan's growing worse and worse,
  And Betty's in a sad _quandary_;
  And then there's nobody to say
  If she must go, or she must stay!                             170
 --She's in a sad _quandary_.

  The clock is on the stroke of one;
  But neither Doctor nor his Guide
  Appears [15] along the moonlight road;
  There's neither horse nor man abroad,                         175
  And Betty's still at Susan's side.

  And Susan now begins to fear [16]
  Of sad mischances not a few,
  That Johnny may perhaps be drowned;
  Or lost, perhaps, and never found;                            180
  Which they must both for ever rue.

  She prefaced half a hint of this
  With, "God forbid it should be true!"
  At the first word that Susan said
  Cried Betty, rising from the bed,                             185
  "Susan, I'd gladly stay with you.

  "I must be gone, I must away:
  Consider, Johnny's but half-wise;
  Susan, we must take care of him,
  If he is hurt in life or limb"--                             190
  "Oh God forbid!" poor Susan cries.

  "What can I do?" says Betty, going,
  "What can I do to ease your pain?
  Good Susan tell me, and I'll stay;
  I fear you're in a dreadful way,                              195
  But I shall soon be back again."

  "Nay, Betty, [17] go! good Betty, go!
  There's nothing that can ease my pain."
  Then off she hies; but with a prayer
  That God poor Susan's life would spare,                       200
  Till she comes back again.

  So, through the moonlight lane she goes,
  And far into the moonlight dale;
  And how she ran, and how she walked,
  And all that to herself she talked,                           205
  Would surely be a tedious tale.

  In high and low, above, below,
  In great and small, in round and square,
  In tree and tower was Johnny seen,
  In bush and brake, in black and green;                        210
  'Twas Johnny, Johnny, every where.

  And while she crossed the bridge, there came
  A thought with which her heart is sore--[18]
  Johnny perhaps his horse forsook,
  To hunt the moon within the brook, [19]                       215
  And never will be heard of more.

  Now is she high [20] upon the down,
  Alone amid a prospect wide;
  There's neither Johnny nor his Horse
  Among the fern or in the gorse;                               220
  There's neither Doctor nor his Guide.

  "Oh saints! what is become of him?
  Perhaps he's climbed into an oak,
  Where he will stay till he is dead;
  Or, sadly he has been misled,                                 225
  And joined the wandering gipsy-folk.

  "Or him that wicked Pony's carried
  To the dark cave, the goblin's hall;
  Or in the castle he's pursuing
  Among the ghosts his own undoing;                             230
  Or playing with the waterfall."

  At poor old Susan then she railed,
  While to the town she posts away;
  "If Susan had not been so ill,
  Alas! I should have had him still,                            235
  My Johnny, till my dying day."

  Poor Betty, in this sad distemper,
  The Doctor's self could [21] hardly spare:
  Unworthy things she talked, and wild;
  Even he, of cattle the most mild,                             240
  The Pony had his share.

  But now she's fairly in the town, [22]
  And to the Doctor's door she hies;
  'Tis silence all on every side;
  The town so long, the town so wide,                           245
  Is silent as the skies.

  And now she's at the Doctor's door,
  She lifts the knocker, rap, rap, rap;
  The Doctor at the casement shows
  His glimmering eyes that peep and doze!                       250
  And one hand rubs his old night-cap.

  "Oh Doctor! Doctor! where's my Johnny?"
  "I'm here, what is't you want with me?"
  "Oh Sir! you know I'm Betty Foy,
  And I have lost my poor dear Boy,                             255
  You know him--him you often see;

  "He's not so wise as some folks be":
  "The devil take his wisdom!" said
  The Doctor, looking somewhat grim,
  "What, Woman! should I know of him?"                          260
  And, grumbling, he went back to bed!

  "O woe is me! O woe is me!
  Here will I die; here will I die;
  I thought to find my lost one here, [23]
  But he is neither far nor near,                               265
  Oh! what a wretched Mother I!"

  She stops, she stands, she looks about;
  Which way to turn she cannot tell.
  Poor Betty! it would ease her pain
  If she had heart to knock again;                              270
 --The clock strikes three--a dismal knell!

  Then up along the town she hies,
  No wonder if her senses fail;
  This piteous news so much it shocked her,
  She quite forgot to send the Doctor,                          275
  To comfort poor old Susan Gale.

  And now she's high upon the down,
  And she can see a mile of road:
  "O cruel! I'm almost threescore;
  Such night as this was ne'er before,                          280
  There's not a single soul abroad."

  She listens, but she cannot hear
  The foot of horse, the voice of man;
  The streams with softest sound are flowing,
  The grass you almost hear it growing,                         285
  You hear it now, if e'er you can.

  The owlets through the long blue night
  Are shouting to each other still:
  Fond lovers! yet not quite hob nob,
  They lengthen out the tremulous sob,                          290
  That echoes far from hill to hill.

  Poor Betty now has lost all hope,
  Her thoughts are bent on deadly sin,
  A green-grown pond she just has past,
  And from the brink she hurries fast,                          295
  Lest she should drown herself therein.

  And now she sits her down and weeps;
  Such tears she never shed before;
  "Oh dear, dear Pony! my sweet joy!
  Oh carry back my Idiot Boy!                                   300
  And we will ne'er o'erload thee more."

  A thought is come into her head:
  The Pony he is mild and good,
  And we have always used him well;
  Perhaps he's gone along the dell,                             305
  And carried Johnny to the wood.

  Then up she springs as if on wings;
  She thinks no more of deadly sin;
  If Betty fifty ponds should see,
  The last of all her thoughts would be                         310
  To drown herself therein.

  O Reader! now that I might tell
  What Johnny and his Horse are doing!
  What they've been doing all this time,
  Oh could I put it into rhyme,                                 315
  A most delightful tale pursuing!

  Perhaps, and no unlikely thought!
  He with his Pony now doth roam
  The cliffs and peaks so high that are,
  To lay his hands upon a star,                                 320
  And in his pocket bring it home.

  Perhaps he's turned himself about,
  His face unto his horse's tail,
  And, still and mute, in wonder lost,
  All silent as a horseman-ghost,                               325
  He travels slowly down the vale. [24]

  And now, perhaps, is hunting [25] sheep,
  A fierce and dreadful hunter he;
  Yon valley, now so trim [26] and green,
  In five months' time, should he be seen,                      330
  A desert wilderness will be!

  Perhaps, with head and heels on fire,
  And like the very soul of evil,
  He's galloping away, away,
  And so will gallop [27] on for aye,                           335
  The bane of all that dread the devil!

  I to the Muses have been bound
  These fourteen years, by strong indentures: [A]
  O gentle Muses! let me tell
  But half of what to him befel;                                340
  He surely met [28] with strange adventures.

  O gentle Muses! is this kind?
  Why will ye thus my suit repel?
  Why of your further aid bereave me?
  And can ye thus unfriended [29] leave me;                     345
  Ye Muses! whom I love so well?

  Who's yon, that, near the waterfall,
  Which thunders down with headlong force
  Beneath the moon, yet shining fair,
  As careless as if nothing were,                               350
  Sits upright on a feeding horse?

  Unto his horse--there feeding [30] free,
  He seems, I think, the rein to give;
  Of moon or stars he takes no heed;
  Of such we in romances read:                                  355
 --'Tis Johnny! Johnny! as I live.

  And that's the very Pony, too!
  Where is she, where is Betty Foy?
  She hardly can sustain her fears;
  The roaring waterfall she hears,                              360
  And cannot find her Idiot Boy.

  Your Pony's worth his weight in gold:
  Then calm your terrors, Betty Foy!
  She's coming from among the trees,
  And now all full in view she sees                             365
  Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy.

  And Betty sees the Pony too:
  Why stand you thus, good Betty Foy?
  It is no goblin, 'tis no ghost,
  'Tis he whom you so long have lost,                           370
  He whom you love, your Idiot Boy.

  She looks again--her arms are up--
  She screams--she cannot move for joy;
  She darts, as with a torrent's force,
  She almost has o'erturned the Horse,                          375
  And fast she holds her Idiot Boy.

  And Johnny burrs, and laughs aloud;
  Whether in cunning or in joy
  I cannot tell; but while he laughs,
  Betty a drunken pleasure quaffs                               380
  To hear again her Idiot Boy.

  And now she's at the Pony's tail,
  And now is [31] at the Pony's head,--
  On that side now, and now on this;
  And, almost stifled with her bliss,                           385
  A few sad tears does Betty shed.

  She kisses o'er and o'er again
  Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy;
  She's happy here, is happy there, [32]
  She is uneasy every where;                                    390
  Her limbs are all alive with joy.

  She pats the Pony, where or when
  She knows not, happy Betty Foy!
  The little Pony glad may be,
  But he is milder far than she,                                395
  You hardly can perceive his joy.

  "Oh! Johnny, never mind the Doctor;
  You've done your best, and that is all:"
  She took the reins, when this was said,
  And gently turned the Pony's head                             400
  From the loud waterfall.

  By this the stars were almost gone,
  The moon was setting on the hill,
  So pale you scarcely looked at her:
  The little birds began to stir,                               405
  Though yet their tongues were still.

  The Pony, Betty, and her Boy,
  Wind slowly through the woody dale;
  And who is she, betimes abroad,
  That hobbles up the steep rough road?                         410
  Who is it, but old Susan Gale?

  Long time lay Susan lost in thought; [33]
  And many dreadful fears beset her,
  Both for her Messenger and Nurse;
  And, as her mind grew worse and worse,                        415
  Her body--it grew better.

  She turned, she tossed herself in bed,
  On all sides doubts and terrors met her;
  Point after point did she discuss;
  And, while her mind was fighting thus,                        420
  Her body still grew better.

  "Alas! what is become of them?
  These fears can never be endured;
  I'll to the wood."--The word scarce said,
  Did Susan rise up from her bed,                               425
  As if by magic cured.

  Away she goes [34] up hill and down,
  And to the wood at length is come;
  She spies her Friends, she shouts a greeting;
  Oh me! it is a merry meeting                                  430
  As ever was in Christendom.

  The owls have hardly sung their last,
  While our four travellers homeward wend;
  The owls have hooted all night long,
  And with the owls began my song,                              435
  And with the owls must end.

  For while they all were travelling home,
  Cried Betty, "Tell us, Johnny, do,
  Where all this long night you have been,
  What you have heard, what you have seen:                      440
  And, Johnny, mind you tell us true."

  Now Johnny all night long had heard
  The owls in tuneful concert strive;
  No doubt too he the moon had seen;
  For in the moonlight he had been                              445
  From eight o'clock till five.

  And thus, to Betty's question, he
  Made answer, like a traveller bold,
  (His very words I give to you,)
  "The cocks did crow to-whoo, to-whoo,                         450
  And the sun did shine so cold!"
 --Thus answered Johnny in his glory,
  And that was all his travel's story.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

    He shouts from ...    1798.]


[Variant 2: Inserted in the editions 1798 to 1820.

    Beneath the moon that shines so bright,
    Till she is tired, let Betty Foy
    With girt and stirrup fiddle-faddle;
    But wherefore set upon a saddle
    Him whom she loves, her idiot boy?]


[Variant 3:

1836.

    There's scarce a soul that's out of bed;    1798.]


[Variant 4: Inserted in the editions 1798 to 1820.

    The world will say 'tis very idle,
    Bethink you of the time of night;
    There's not a mother, no not one,
    But when she hears what you have done,
    Oh! Betty she'll be in a fright.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

    Has up upon the saddle set,     1798.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

    ... that's in the dale,    1798.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

    ... bough's ...    1798.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

    And Betty's standing at the door,
    And Betty's face with joy o'erflows, 1798.]


[Variant 9:

1820.

    And Johnny's in a merry tune,     1798.]


[Variant 10:

1827.

    And ...    1798.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

    What comfort Johnny soon will bring,     1798.

    What comfort soon her Boy will bring,    1827.]


[Variant 12:

1827.

    And Betty's still at Susan's side:
    By this time she's not quite so flurried;    1798.]


[Variant 13:

1827.

    They'll both be ...    1798.]


[Variant 14:

1827.

    'Tis on the stroke--"If Johnny's near,"
    Quoth Betty, "he will soon be here,"    1798.]


[Variant 15:

1836.

    Appear ...    1798.]


[Variant 16:

1827.

    ... she begins to fear    1798.]

[Variant 17:

1800.

    Good Betty [i] ...    1798.]


[Variant 18:

1836.

    She's past the bridge that's in the dale,
    And now the thought torments her sore,     1798.

    She's past the bridge far in the dale;     1820.

    The bridge is past--far in the dale;       1827.]


[Variant 19:

1827.

    ... that's in the brook,    1798.]


[Variant 20:

1827.

    And now she's high ...    1798.]


[Variant 21.

1827.

    ...would ...      1798.]


[Variant 22.

1836.

    And now she's got into the town,     1798.]


[Variant 23:

1827.

    ... my Johnny here, 1798.]


[Variant 24.

1836.

    All like a silent horseman-ghost,
    He travels on along the vale.         1798.]


[Variant 25.

1820.

    ... he's hunting . . 1798.]


[Variant 26.

1820.

    ...that's so trim .... 1798.]


[Variant 27.

1827.

    ...he'll gallop .... 1798.]


[Variant 28.

1802.

    For sure he met .....           1798.]


[Variant 29.

1798.

    ...unfriendly....

Only in MS. and in the edition of 1805.]


[Variant 30:

1827.

    ...that's feeding ... 1798.]


[Variant 31:

1827.

    And now she's ...    1798.]


[Variant 32:

1827.

    ... she's happy there,     1798.]


[Variant 33:

1827

    Long Susan lay deep lost in thought,     1798.]


[Variant 34: 1836.

    ... she posts ...     1798.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: As Wordsworth gives the date of this poem as 1798, the
above line implies that his poetical work began at least in 1784, when
he was fourteen years of age. The note to 'An Evening Walk' dictated to
Miss Fenwick (see p. 5) implies the same.--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE VARIANT

[Sub-Footnote i: This change was made by S. T. C.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE OLD CUMBERLAND BEGGAR [A]


Composed 1798.--Published 1800.


The class of Beggars to which the old man here described
belongs, will probably soon be extinct. It consisted of poor,
and, mostly, old and infirm persons, who confined themselves to
a stated round in their neighbourhood, and had certain fixed
days, on which, at different houses, they regularly received
charity; sometimes in money, but mostly in provisions.-W. W.
1800.

  [Observed, and with great benefit to my own heart, when I was a child.
  Written at Racedown and Alfoxden in my twenty-third year. [B] The
  Political Economists were about that time beginning their war upon
  mendicity in all its forms, and by implication, if not directly, on
  alms-giving also. This heartless process has been carried as far as it
  can go by the AMENDED Poor Law Bill, tho' the inhumanity that prevails
  in this measure is somewhat disguised by the profession that one of
  its objects is to throw the poor upon the voluntary donations of their
  neighbours; that is, if rightly interpreted, to force them into a
  condition between relief in the Union Poor House and alms robbed of
  their Christian grace and spirit, as being _forced_ rather from the
  benevolent than given by them; while the avaricious and selfish, and
  all, in fact, but the humane and charitable, are at liberty to keep
  all they possess from their distressed brethren.--I. F.]

Included among the "Poems referring to the Period of Old Age."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  I saw an aged Beggar in my walk;
  And he was seated, by the highway side,
  On a low structure of rude masonry
  Built at the foot of a huge hill, that they
  Who lead their horses down the steep rough road                  5
  May thence remount at ease. The aged Man
  Had placed his staff across the broad smooth stone
  That overlays the pile; and, from a bag
  All white with flour, the dole of village dames,
  He drew his scraps and fragments, one by one;                   10
  And scanned them with a fixed and serious look
  Of idle computation. In the sun,
  Upon the second step of that small pile,
  Surrounded by those wild unpeopled hills,
  He sat, and ate [1] his food in solitude:                       15
  And ever, scattered from his palsied hand,
  That, still attempting to prevent the waste,
  Was baffled still, the crumbs in little showers
  Fell on the ground; and the small mountain birds,
  Not venturing yet to peck their destined meal,                  20
  Approached within the length of half his staff.

  Him from my childhood have I known; and then
  He was so old, he seems not older now;
  He travels on, a solitary Man,
  So helpless in appearance, that for him                         25
  The sauntering Horseman throws not with a slack
  And careless hand [2] his alms upon the ground,
  But stops,--that he may safely lodge the coin
  Within the old Man's hat; nor quits him so,
  But still, when he has given his horse the rein,                30
  Watches the aged Beggar with a look [3]
  Sidelong, and half-reverted. She who tends
  The toll-gate, when in summer at her door
  She turns her wheel, if on the road she sees
  The aged beggar coming, quits her work,                         35
  And lifts the latch for him that he may pass.
  The post-boy, when his rattling wheels o'ertake
  The aged Beggar in the woody lane,
  Shouts to him from behind; and, if thus warned [4]
  The old man does not change his course, the boy                 40
  Turns with less noisy wheels to the roadside,
  And passes gently by, without a curse
  Upon his lips, or anger at his heart.

  He travels on, a solitary Man;
  His age has no companion. On the ground                         45
  His eyes are turned, and, as he moves along,
  _They_ move along the ground; and, evermore,
  Instead of common and habitual sight
  Of fields with rural works, of hill and dale,
  And the blue sky, one little span of earth                      50
  Is all his prospect. Thus, from day to day,
  Bow-bent, his eyes for ever on the ground, [5]
  He plies his weary journey; seeing still,
  And seldom [6] knowing that he sees, some straw,
  Some scattered leaf, or marks which, in one track,              55
  The nails of cart or chariot-wheel have left
  Impressed on the white road,--in the same line,
  At distance still the same. Poor Traveller!
  His staff trails with him; scarcely do his feet [7]
  Disturb the summer dust; he is so still                         60
  In look and motion, that the cottage curs, [8]
  Ere he has [9] passed the door, will turn away,
  Weary of barking at him. Boys and girls,
  The vacant and the busy, maids and youths,
  And urchins newly breeched--all pass him by:                    65
  Him even the slow-paced waggon leaves behind.

  But deem not this Man useless.--Statesmen! ye
  Who are so restless in your wisdom, ye
  Who have a broom still ready in your hands
  To rid the world of nuisances; ye proud,                        70
  Heart-swoln, while in your pride ye contemplate
  Your talents, power, or [10] wisdom, deem him not
  A burthen of the earth! 'Tis nature's law
  That none, the meanest of created things,
  Of forms created the most vile and brute,                       75
  The dullest or most noxious, should exist
  Divorced from good--a spirit and pulse of good,
  A life and soul, to every mode of being
  Inseparably linked. Then be assured
  That least of all can aught--that ever owned                    80
  The heaven-regarding eye and front sublime [C]
  Which man is born to--sink, howe'er depressed,
  So low as to be scorned without a sin;
  Without offence to God cast out of view;
  Like the dry remnant of a garden-flower                         85
  Whose seeds are shed, or as an implement
  Worn out and worthless. [11] While from door to door
  This old Man creeps, [12] the villagers in him
  Behold a record which together binds
  Past deeds and offices of charity,                              90
  Else unremembered, and so keeps alive
  The kindly mood in hearts which lapse of years,
  And that half-wisdom half-experience gives,
  Make slow to feel, and by sure steps resign
  To selfishness and cold oblivious cares.                        95
  Among the farms and solitary huts,
  Hamlets and thinly-scattered villages,
  Where'er the aged Beggar takes his rounds,
  The mild necessity of use compels
  To acts of love; and habit does the work                       100
  Of reason; yet prepares that after-joy
  Which reason cherishes. And thus the soul,
  By that sweet taste of pleasure unpursued
  Doth find herself [13] insensibly disposed
  To virtue and true goodness.                                   105
                               Some there are,
  By their good works exalted, lofty minds
  And meditative, authors of delight
  And happiness, which to the end of time
  Will live, and spread, and kindle: even such minds [14]        110
  In childhood, from this solitary Being,
  Or from like wanderer, haply have received [15]
  (A thing more precious far than all that books
  Or the solicitudes of love can do!)
  That first mild touch of sympathy and thought,                 115
  In which they found their kindred with a world
  Where want and sorrow were. The easy man
  Who sits at his own door,--and, like the pear
  That [16] overhangs his head from the green wall,
  Feeds in the sunshine; the robust and young,                   120
  The prosperous and unthinking, they who live
  Sheltered, and flourish in a little grove
  Of their own kindred;--all behold in him
  A silent monitor, which on their minds
  Must needs impress a transitory thought                        125
  Of self-congratulation, to the heart
  Of each recalling his peculiar boons,
  His charters and exemptions; and, perchance,
  Though he to no one give the fortitude
  And circumspection needful to preserve                         130
  His present blessings, and to husband up
  The respite of the season, he, at least,
  And 'tis no vulgar service, makes them felt.

  Yet further.--Many, I believe, there are
  Who live a life of virtuous decency,                           135
  Men who can hear the Decalogue and feel
  No self-reproach; who of the moral law
  Established in the land where they abide
  Are strict observers; and not negligent
  In acts of love to those with whom they dwell, [17]            140
  Their kindred, and the children of their blood.
  Praise be to such, and to their slumbers peace!
 --But of the poor man ask, the abject poor;
  Go, and demand of him, if there be here
  In this cold abstinence from evil deeds,                       145
  And these inevitable charities,
  Wherewith to satisfy the human soul?
  No--man is dear to man; the poorest poor
  Long for some moments in a weary life
  When they can know and feel that they have been,               150
  Themselves, the fathers and the dealers-out
  Of some small blessings; have been kind to such
  As needed kindness, for this single cause,
  That we have all of us one human heart.
 --Such pleasure is to one kind Being known,                    155
  My neighbour, when with punctual care, each week
  Duly as Friday comes, though pressed herself
  By her own wants, she from her store [18] of meal
  Takes one unsparing handful for the scrip
  Of this old Mendicant, and, from her door                      160
  Returning with exhilarated heart,
  Sits by her fire, and builds her hope in heaven.

  Then let him pass, a blessing on his head!
  And while in that vast solitude to which
  The tide of things has borne [19] him, he appears              165
  To breathe and live but for himself alone,
  Unblamed, uninjured, let him bear about
  The good which the benignant law of Heaven
  Has hung around him: and, while life is his,
  Still let him prompt the unlettered villagers                  170
  To tender offices and pensive thoughts. [D]
 --Then let him pass, a blessing on his head!
  And, long as he can wander, let him breathe
  The freshness of the valleys; let his blood
  Struggle with frosty air and winter snows;                     175
  And let the chartered wind that sweeps the heath
  Beat his grey locks against his withered face.
  Reverence the hope whose vital anxiousness
  Gives the last human interest to his heart.
  May never HOUSE, misnamed of INDUSTRY,                         180
  Make him a captive!--for that pent-up din,
  Those life-consuming sounds that clog the air,
  Be his the natural silence of old age!
  Let him be free of mountain solitudes;
  And have around him, whether heard or not,                     185
  The pleasant melody of woodland birds.
  Few are his pleasures: if his eyes have now
  Been doomed so long to settle upon earth
  That not without some effort they behold
  The countenance of the horizontal sun, [20]                    190
  Rising or setting, let the light at least
  Find a free entrance to their languid orbs.
  And let him, _where_ and _when_ he will, sit down
  Beneath the trees, or on a [21] grassy bank
  Of highway side, and with the little birds                     195
  Share his chance-gathered meal; and, finally,
  As in the eye of Nature he has lived,
  So in the eye of Nature let him die! [E]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1805.

...     eat ...     1800.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

    The sauntering horseman-traveller does not throw
    With careless hand ...                            1800.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

    Towards the aged Beggar turns a look,     1800.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

    ... and, if perchance     1800.]


[Variant 5:

1800.

    ... and, evermore,
    Instead of Nature's fair variety,]
    Her ample scope of hill and dale, of clouds
    And the blue sky, the same short span of earth
    Is all his prospect. When the little birds
    Flit over him, if their quick shadows strike
    Across his path, he does not lift his head
    Like one whose thoughts have been unsettled. So
    Brow-bent, his eyes for ever ...                    MS.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

    And never ...     1800.]


[Variant 7:

1800.

    ... his slow footsteps scarce     MS.]


[Variant 8:

1800.

    ... that the miller's dog
    Is tired of barking at him.     MS.]


[Variant 9:

1837.

    ... have ...     1800.]


[Variant 10:

1837.

    ... and ...     1800.]


[Variant 11: The lines from "Then be assured" to "worthless" were added
in the edition of 1837.]


[Variant 12:

1837.

    ... While thus he creeps
    From door to door, ...    1800.]


[Variant 13:

1832.

    ... itself ...     1800.]


[Variant 14:

1827.

    ... ; minds like these,     1800.]


[Variant 15:

1827.

    This helpless wanderer, have perchance receiv'd,     1800.]


[Variant 16:

1827.

    Which ...     1800.]


[Variant 17:

1827.

    ... and not negligent,
    Meanwhile, in any tenderness of heart
    Or act of love ...                     1800.]


[Variant 18:

1827.

    ... chest ...    1800.]


[Variant 19:

1827.

    ... led ...    1800.]


[Variant 20:

1837.

    ... if his eyes, which now
    Have been so long familiar with the earth,
    No more behold the horizontal sun           1800.

    ... if his eyes have now
    Been doomed so long to settle on the earth
    That not without some effort they behold
    The countenance of the horizontal sun,      1815.]


[Variant 21:

1837.

    ... or by the ...    1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In an early MS. the title of this poem is 'Description of a
Beggar', and in the editions 1800 to 1820 the title was 'The Old
Cumberland Beggar, a Description'.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Wordsworth went to Racedown in 1795, when he was
twenty-five years of age; and was at Alfoxden in his twenty-eighth
year.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' I. 84:

  Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
  Jussit et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.

Ed.]


[Footnote D: With this poem compare Frederick William Faber's "Hymn,"
which he called 'The Old Labourer', beginning:

  What end doth he fulfil!
  He seems without a will.
Ed.]


[Footnote E: In January 1801 Charles Lamb thus wrote to Wordsworth of
his 'Old Cumberland Beggar':

  "It appears to me a fault that the instructions conveyed in it are too
  direct, and like a lecture: they don't slide into the mind of the
  reader while he is imagining no such matter,"

At the same time he refers to

  "the delicate and curious feeling in the wish of the Beggar that he
  may have about him the melody of birds, although he hears them not."

('The Letters of Charles Lamb', edited by Alfred Ainger, vol. i. p.
163.)--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





ANIMAL TRANQUILLITY AND DECAY


Composed 1798.--Published 1798.


  [If I recollect right, these verses were an overflowing from 'The Old
  Cumberland Beggar'.--I. F.]

They were published in the first edition of "Lyrical Ballads" (1798),
but 'The Old Cumberland Beggar' was not published till 1800. In an early
MS., however, the two are incorporated.

In the edition of 1798, the poem was called, 'Old Man Travelling; Animal
Tranquillity and Decay, a Sketch'. In 1800, the title was 'Animal
Tranquillity and Decay. A Sketch'. In 1845, it was 'Animal Tranquillity
and Decay'.

It was included among the "Poems referring to the Period of Old
Age."--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POEM


  The little hedgerow birds,
  That peck along the road, regard him not.
  He travels on, and in his face, his step,
  His gait, is one expression: every limb,
  His look and bending figure, all bespeak                         5
  A man who does not move with pain, but moves
  With thought.--He is insensibly subdued
  To settled quiet: he is one by whom
  All effort seems forgotten; one to whom
  Long patience hath [1] such mild composure given,               10
  That patience now doth seem a thing of which
  He hath no need. He is by nature led
  To peace so perfect that the young behold
  With envy, what the Old Man hardly feels. [2]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1805.

    ...has...     1798.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

   --I asked him whither he was bound, and what
    The object of his journey; he replied
    "Sir! I am going many miles to take
    A last leave of my son, a mariner,
    Who from a sea-fight has been brought to Falmouth,
    And there is dying in an hospital."                         1798.

    ... he replied
    That he was going many miles to take
    A last leave of his son, a mariner,
    Who from a sea-fight had been brought to Falmouth,
    And there was dying [i] in an hospital.             1800 to 1805.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE VARIANT

[Sub-Footnote i: The edition of 1800 has "lying," evidently a
misprint.--Ed.]





           *       *       *       *       *





APPENDIX



I

The following is the full text of the original edition of 'Descriptive
Sketches', first published in 1793:


DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES

IN VERSE.
TAKEN DURING A
PEDESTRIAN TOUR
IN THE
ITALIAN, GRISON, SWISS, AND SAVOYARD
ALPS. BY
W. WORDSWORTH, B.A.
OF ST. JOHN'S, CAMBRIDGE.
"LOCA PASTORUM DESERTA ATQUE OTIA DIA."
'Lucret'.
"CASTELLA IN TUMULIS--
ET LONGE SALTUS LATEQUE VACANTES."
'Virgil'.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON, ST. PAUL'S CHURCH-YARD.
1793.


TO THE REV. ROBERT JONES, FELLOW OF ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.


Dear sir, However desirous I might have been of giving you proofs of the
high place you hold in my esteem, I should have been cautious of
wounding your delicacy by thus publicly addressing you, had not the
circumstance of my having accompanied you amongst the Alps, seemed to
give this dedication a propriety sufficient to do away any scruples
which your modesty might otherwise have suggested.

In inscribing this little work to you I consult my heart. You know well
how great is the difference between two companions lolling in a post
chaise, and two travellers plodding slowly along the road, side by side,
each with his little knap-sack of necessaries upon his shoulders. How
much more of heart between the two latter!

I am happy in being conscious I shall have one reader who will approach
the conclusion of these few pages with regret. You they must certainly
interest, in reminding you of moments to which you can hardly look back
without a pleasure not the less dear from a shade of melancholy. You
will meet with few images without recollecting the spot where we
observed them together, consequently, whatever is feeble in my design,
or spiritless in my colouring, will be amply supplied by your own
memory.

With still greater propriety I might have inscribed to you a description
of some of the features of your native mountains, through which we have
wandered together, in the same manner, with so much pleasure. But the
sea-sunsets which give such splendour to the vale of Clwyd, Snowdon, the
chair of Idris, the quiet village of Bethkelert, Menai and her druids,
the Alpine steeps of the Conway, and the still more interesting windings
of the wizard stream of the Dee remain yet untouched. Apprehensive that
my pencil may never be exercised on these subjects, I cannot let slip
this opportunity of thus publicly assuring you with how much affection
and esteem,

I am Dear Sir,

Your most obedient very humble Servant

W. WORDSWORTH.



ARGUMENT

'Happiness (if she had been to be found on Earth) amongst the Charms of
Nature--Pleasures of the pedestrian Traveller--Author crosses France to
the Alps--Present state of the Grande Chartreuse--Lake of Como--Time,
Sunset--Same Scene, Twilight--Same Scene, Morning, it's Voluptuous
Character; Old Man and Forest Cottage Music--River Tusa--Via Mala and
Grison Gypsey. Valley of Sckellenen-thal--Lake of Uri, Stormy
Sunset--Chapel of William Tell--force of Local Emotion--Chamois
Chaser--View of the higher Alps--Manner of Life of a Swiss Mountaineer
interspersed with views of the higher Alps--Golden Age of the Alps--Life
and Views continued--Ranz des Vaches famous Swiss Air--Abbey of
Einsiedlen and it's Pilgrims--Valley of Chamouny--Mont Blanc--Slavery of
Savoy--Influence of Liberty on Cottage Happiness--France--Wish for the
extirpation of Slavery--Conclusion.'


DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES [A]


  Were there, below, a spot of holy ground,
  By Pain and her sad family unfound,
  Sure, Nature's GOD that spot to man had giv'n,
  Where murmuring rivers join the song of ev'n;
  Where falls the purple morning far and wide                       5
  In flakes of light upon the mountain-side;
  Where summer Suns in ocean sink to rest,
  Or moonlight Upland lifts her hoary breast;
  Where Silence, on her night of wing, o'er-broods
  Unfathom'd dells and undiscover'd woods;                         10
  Where rocks and groves the power of waters shakes
  In cataracts, or sleeps in quiet lakes.

  But doubly pitying Nature loves to show'r
  Soft on his wounded heart her healing pow'r,
  Who plods o'er hills and vales his road forlorn,                 15
  Wooing her varying charms from eve to morn.
  No sad vacuities his heart annoy,
  Blows not a Zephyr but it whispers joy;
  For him lost flowers their idle sweets exhale;
  He tastes the meanest note that swells the gale;                 20
  For him sod-seats the cottage-door adorn,
  And peeps the far-off spire, his evening bourn!
  Dear is the forest frowning o'er his head,
  And dear the green-sward to his velvet tread;
  Moves there a cloud o'er mid-day's flaming eye?                  25
  Upward he looks--and calls it luxury;
  Kind Nature's charities his steps attend,
  In every babbling brook he finds a friend,
  While chast'ning thoughts of sweetest use, bestow'd
  By Wisdom, moralize his pensive road.                            30
  Host of his welcome inn, the noon-tide bow'r,
  To his spare meal he calls the passing poor;
  He views the Sun uprear his golden fire,
  Or sink, with heart alive like [B] Memnon's lyre;
  Blesses the Moon that comes with kindest ray                     35
  To light him shaken by his viewless way.
  With bashful fear no cottage children steal
  From him, a brother at the cottage meal,
  His humble looks no shy restraint impart,
  Around him plays at will the virgin heart.                       40
  While unsuspended wheels the village dance,
  The maidens eye him with inquiring glance,
  Much wondering what sad stroke of crazing Care
  Or desperate Love could lead a wanderer there.

  Me, lur'd by hope her sorrows to remove,                         45
  A heart, that could not much itself approve,
  O'er Gallia's wastes of corn dejected led,
  [C] Her road elms rustling thin above my head,
  Or through her truant pathway's native charms,
  By secret villages and lonely farms,                             50
  To where the Alps, ascending white in air,
  Toy with the Sun, and glitter from afar.

  Ev'n now I sigh at hoary Chartreuse' doom
  Weeping beneath his chill of mountain gloom.
  Where now is fled that Power whose frown severe                  55
  Tam'd "sober Reason" till she crouch'd in fear?
  That breath'd a death-like peace these woods around
  Broke only by th' unvaried torrent's sound,
  Or prayer-bell by the dull cicada drown'd.
  The cloister startles at the gleam of arms,                      60
  And Blasphemy the shuddering fane alarms;
  Nod the cloud-piercing pines their troubl'd heads,
  Spires, rocks, and lawns, a browner night o'erspreads.
  Strong terror checks the female peasant's sighs,
  And start th' astonish'd shades at female eyes.                  65
  The thundering tube the aged angler hears,
  And swells the groaning torrent with his tears.
  From Bruno's forest screams the frighted jay,
  And slow th' insulted eagle wheels away.
  The cross with hideous laughter Demons mock,                     70
  By [D] angels planted on the aereal rock.
  The "parting Genius" sighs with hollow breath
  Along the mystic streams of [E] Life and Death.
  Swelling the outcry dull, that long resounds
  Portentous, thro' her old woods' trackless bounds,               75
  Deepening her echoing torrents' awful peal
  And bidding paler shades her form conceal,
  [F] Vallombre, mid her falling fanes, deplores,
  For ever broke, the sabbath of her bow'rs.

  More pleas'd, my foot the hidden margin roves                    80
  Of Como bosom'd deep in chesnut groves.
  No meadows thrown between, the giddy steeps
  Tower, bare or sylvan, from the narrow deeps.
  To towns, whose shades of no rude sound complain,
  To ringing team unknown and grating wain,                        85
  To flat-roof'd towns, that touch the water's bound,
  Or lurk in woody sunless glens profound,
  Or from the bending rocks obtrusive cling,
  And o'er the whiten'd wave their shadows fling;
  Wild round the steeps the little [G] pathway twines,             90
  And Silence loves it's purple roof of vines.
  The viewless lingerer hence, at evening, sees
  From rock-hewn steps the sail between the trees;
  Or marks, mid opening cliffs, fair dark-ey'd maids
  Tend the small harvest of their garden glades,                   95
  Or, led by distant warbling notes, surveys,
  With hollow ringing ears and darkening gaze,
  Binding the charmed soul in powerless trance,
  Lip-dewing Song and ringlet-tossing Dance,
  Where sparkling eyes and breaking smiles illume                 100
  The bosom'd cabin's lyre-enliven'd gloom;
  Or stops the solemn mountain-shades to view
  Stretch, o'er their pictur'd mirror, broad and blue,
  Tracking the yellow sun from steep to steep,
  As up th' opposing hills, with tortoise foot, they creep.       105
  Here half a village shines, in gold array'd,
  Bright as the moon, half hides itself in shade.
  From the dark sylvan roofs the restless spire
  Inconstant glancing, mounts like springing fire.
  There, all unshaded, blazing forests throw no                   110
  Rich golden verdure on the waves below.
  Slow glides the sail along th' illumin'd shore,
  And steals into the shade the lazy oar.
  Soft bosoms breathe around contagious sighs,
  And amourous music on the water dies.                           115
  Heedless how Pliny, musing here, survey'd
  Old Roman boats and figures thro' the shade,
  Pale Passion, overpower'd, retires and woos
  The thicket, where th' unlisten'd stock-dove coos.

  How bless'd, delicious Scene! the eye that greets               120
  Thy open beauties, or thy lone retreats;
  Th' unwearied sweep of wood thy cliffs that scales,
  The never-ending waters of thy vales;
  The cots, those dim religious groves enbow'r,
  Or, under rocks that from the water tow'r                       125
  Insinuated, sprinkling all the shore,
  Each with his household boat beside the door,
  Whose flaccid sails in forms fantastic droop,
  Bright'ning the gloom where thick the forests stoop;
 --Thy torrents shooting from the clear-blue sky,                130
  Thy towns, like swallows' nests that cleave on high;
  That glimmer hoar in eve's last light, descry'd
  Dim from the twilight water's shaggy side,
  Whence lutes and voices down th' enchanted woods
  Steal, and compose the oar-forgotten floods,                    135
  While Evening's solemn bird melodious weeps,
  Heard, by star-spotted bays, beneath the steeps;
 --Thy lake, mid smoking woods, that blue and grey
  Gleams, streak'd or dappled, hid from morning's ray
  Slow-travelling down the western hills, to fold                 140
  It's green-ting'd margin in a blaze of gold;
  From thickly-glittering spires the matin-bell
  Calling the woodman from his desert cell,
  A summons to the sound of oars, that pass,
  Spotting the steaming deeps, to early mass;                     145
  Slow swells the service o'er the water born,
  While fill each pause the ringing woods of morn.

  Farewel! those forms that, in thy noon-tide shade,
  Rest, near their little plots of wheaten glade;
  Those stedfast eyes, that beating breasts inspire               150
  To throw the "sultry ray" of young Desire;
  Those lips, whose tides of fragrance come, and go,
  Accordant to the cheek's unquiet glow;
  Those shadowy breasts in love's soft light array'd,
  And rising, by the moon of passion sway'd.                      155

 --Thy fragrant gales and lute-resounding streams,
  Breathe o'er the failing soul voluptuous dreams;
  While Slavery, forcing the sunk mind to dwell
  On joys that might disgrace the captive's cell,
  Her shameless timbrel shakes along thy marge,                   160
  And winds between thine isles the vocal barge.

  Yet, arts are thine that rock th' unsleeping heart,
  And smiles to Solitude and Want impart.
  I lov'd, mid thy most desert woods astray,
  With pensive step to measure my slow way, [H]                   165
  By lonely, silent cottage-doors to roam,
  The far-off peasant's day-deserted home;
  Once did I pierce to where a cabin stood,
  The red-breast peace had bury'd it in wood,
  There, by the door a hoary-headed sire                          170
  Touch'd with his wither'd hand an aged lyre;
  Beneath an old-grey oak as violets lie,
  Stretch'd at his feet with stedfast, upward eye,
  His children's children join'd the holy sound,
  A hermit--with his family around.                               175

  Hence shall we seek where fair Locarno smiles
  Embower'd in walnut slopes and citron isles,
  Or charms that smile on Tusa's evening stream,
  While mid dim towers and woods her [I] waters gleam;
  From the bright wave, in solemn gloom, retire                   180
  The dull-red steeps, and darkening still, aspire,
  To where afar rich orange lustres glow
  Round undistinguish'd clouds, and rocks, and snow;
  Or, led where Viamala's chasms confine
  Th' indignant waters of the infant Rhine,                       185
  Bend o'er th' abyss?--the else impervious gloom
  His burning eyes with fearful light illume.
  The Grison gypsey here her tent has plac'd,
  Sole human tenant of the piny waste;
  Her tawny skin, dark eyes, and glossy locks,                    190
  Bend o'er the smoke that curls beneath the rocks.

 --The mind condemn'd, without reprieve, to go
  O'er life's long deserts with it's charge of woe,
  With sad congratulation joins the train,
  Where beasts and men together o'er the plain                    195
  Move on,--a mighty caravan of pain;
  Hope, strength, and courage, social suffering brings,
  Freshening the waste of sand with shades and springs.

 --She solitary through the desert drear
  Spontaneous wanders, hand in hand with Fear.                    200

  A giant moan along the forest swells
  Protracted, and the twilight storm foretells,
  And, ruining from the cliffs their deafening load
  Tumbles, the wildering Thunder slips abroad;
  On the high summits Darkness comes and goes,                    205
  Hiding their fiery clouds, their rocks, and snows;
  The torrent, travers'd by the lustre broad,
  Starts like a horse beside the flashing road;
  In the roof'd [J] bridge, at that despairing hour,
  She seeks a shelter from the battering show'r.                  210
 --Fierce comes the river down; the crashing wood
  Gives way, and half it's pines torment the flood;
  [K] Fearful, beneath, the Water-spirits call,
  And the bridge vibrates, tottering to its fall.

 --Heavy, and dull, and cloudy is the night,                     215
  No star supplies the comfort of it's light,
  Glimmer the dim-lit Alps, dilated, round,
  And one sole light shifts in the vale profound;
  While, opposite, the waning moon hangs still,
  And red, above her melancholy hill.                             220
  By the deep quiet gloom appall'd, she sighs,
  Stoops her sick head, and shuts her weary eyes.
 --Breaking th' ascending roar of desert floods,
  And insect buzz, that stuns the sultry woods,
  She hears, upon the mountain forest's brow,                     225
  The death-dog, howling loud and long, below;
  On viewless fingers counts the valley-clock,
  Followed by drowsy crow of midnight cock.
 --Bursts from the troubl'd Larch's giant boughs
  The pie, and chattering breaks the night's repose.              230
  Low barks the fox; by Havoc rouz'd the bear,
  Quits, growling, the white bones that strew his lair;
  The dry leaves stir as with the serpent's walk,
  And, far beneath, Banditti voices talk;
  Behind her hill the Moon, all crimson, rides,                   235
  And his red eyes the slinking Water hides;
  Then all is hush'd; the bushes rustle near,
  And with strange tinglings sings her fainting ear.
 --Vex'd by the darkness, from the piny gulf
  Ascending, nearer howls the famish'd wolf,                      240
  While thro' the stillness scatters wild dismay,
  Her babe's small cry, that leads him to his prey.

  Now, passing Urseren's open vale serene,
  Her quiet streams, and hills of downy green,
  Plunge with the Russ embrown'd by Terror's breath,              245
  Where danger roofs the narrow walks of death;
  By floods, that, thundering from their dizzy height,
  Swell more gigantic on the stedfast sight;
  Black drizzling craggs, that beaten by the din,
  Vibrate, as if a voice complain'd within;                       250
  Bare steeps, where Desolation stalks, afraid,
  Unstedfast, by a blasted yew upstay'd;
  By [L] cells whose image, trembling as he prays,
  Awe-struck, the kneeling peasant scarce surveys;
  Loose-hanging rocks the Day's bless'd eye that hide,            255
  And [M] crosses rear'd to Death on every side,
  Which with cold kiss Devotion planted near,
  And, bending, water'd with the human tear,
  Soon fading "silent" from her upward eye,
  Unmov'd with each rude form of Danger nigh,                     260
  Fix'd on the anchor left by him who saves
  Alike in whelming snows and roaring waves.

  On as we move, a softer prospect opes,
  Calm huts, and lawns between, and sylvan slopes.
  While mists, suspended on th' expiring gale,                    265
  Moveless o'er-hang the deep secluded vale,
  The beams of evening, slipping soft between,
  Light up of tranquil joy a sober scene;
  Winding it's dark-green wood and emerald glade,
  The still vale lengthens underneath the shade;                  270
  While in soft gloom the scattering bowers recede,
  Green dewy lights adorn the freshen'd mead,
  Where solitary forms illumin'd stray
  Turning with quiet touch the valley's hay,
  On the low [N] brown wood-huts delighted sleep                  275
  Along the brighten'd gloom reposing deep.
  While pastoral pipes and streams the landscape lull,
  And bells of passing mules that tinkle dull,
  In solemn shapes before th' admiring eye
  Dilated hang the misty pines on high,                           280
  Huge convent domes with pinnacles and tow'rs,
  And antique castles seen tho' drizzling show'rs.

  From such romantic dreams my sould awake,
  Lo! Fear looks silent down on Uri's lake,
  By whose unpathway'd margin still and dread                     285
  Was never heard the plodding peasant's tread.
  Tower like a wall the naked rocks, or reach
  Far o'er the secret water dark with beech,
  More high, to where creation seems to end,
  Shade above shade the desert pines ascend,                      290
  And still, below, where mid the savage scene
  Peeps out a little speck of smilgin green,
  There with his infants man undaunted creeps
  And hangs his small wood-hut upon the steeps.
  A garden-plot the desert air perfumes,                          295
  Mid the dark pines a little orchard blooms,
  A zig-zag path from the domestic skiff
  Threading the painful cragg surmounts the cliff.
 --Before those hermit doors, that never know
  The face of traveller passing to and fro,                       300
  No peasant leans upon his pole, to tell
  For whom at morning toll'd the funeral bell,
  Their watch-dog ne'er his angry bark forgoes,
  Touch'd by the beggar's moan of human woes,
  The grass seat beneath their casement shade                     305
  The pilgrim's wistful eye hath never stay'd.
 --There, did the iron Genius not disdain
  The gentle Power that haunts the myrtle plain,
  There might the love-sick maiden sit, and chide
  Th' insuperable rocks and severing tide,                        310
  There watch at eve her lover's sun-gilt sail
  Approaching, and upbraid the tardy gale,
  There list at midnight till is heard no more,
  Below, the echo of his parting oar,
  There hang in fear, when growls the frozen stream,              315
  To guide his dangerous tread the taper's gleam.

  Mid stormy vapours ever driving by,
  Where ospreys, cormorants, and herons cry,
  Where hardly giv'n the hopeless waste to chear,
  Deny'd the bread of life the foodful ear,                       320
  Dwindles the pear on autumn's latest spray,
  And apple sickens pale in summer's ray,
  Ev'n here Content has fix'd her smiling reign
  With Independance child of high Disdain.
  Exulting mid the winter of the skies,                           325
  Shy as the jealous chamois, Freedom flies,
  And often grasps her sword, and often eyes,
  Her crest a bough of Winter's bleakest pine,
  Strange "weeds" and alpine plants her helm entwine,
  And wildly-pausing oft she hangs aghast,                        330
  While thrills the "Spartan fife" between the blast.

  'Tis storm; and hid in mist from hour to hour
  All day the floods a deeper murmur pour,
  And mournful sounds, as of a Spirit lost,
  Pipe wild along the hollow-blustering coast,                    335
  'Till the Sun walking on his western field
  Shakes from behind the clouds his flashing shield.
  Triumphant on the bosom of the storm,
  Glances the fire-clad eagle's wheeling form;
  Eastward, in long perspective glittering, shine                 340
  The wood-crown'd cliffs that o'er the lake recline;
  Wide o'er the Alps a hundred streams unfold,
  At once to pillars turn'd that flame with gold;
  Behind his sail the peasant strives to shun
  The west that burns like one dilated sun,                       345
  Where in a mighty crucible expire
  The mountains, glowing hot, like coals of fire. [O]

  But lo! the boatman, over-aw'd, before
  The pictur'd fane of Tell suspends his oar;
  Confused the Marathonian tale appears,                          350
  While burn in his full eyes the glorious tears.
  And who but feels a power of strong controul,
  Felt only there, oppress his labouring soul,
  Who walks, where honour'd men of ancient days
  Have wrought with god-like arm the deeds of praise?             355
  Say, who, by thinking on Canadian hills,
  Or wild Aosta lulled by Alpine rills,
  On Zutphen's plain; or where with soften'd gaze
  The old grey stones the plaided chief surveys,
  Can guess the high resolve, the cherish'd pain                  360
  Of him whom passion rivets to the plain,
  Where breath'd the gale that caught Wolfe's happiest sigh,
  And the last sun-beam fell on Bayard's eye,
  Where bleeding Sydney from the cup retir'd,
  And glad Dundee in "faint huzzas" expir'd.                      365

  But now with other soul I stand alone
  Sublime upon this far-surveying cone,
  And watch from [P] pike to pike amid the sky
  Small as a bird the chamois-chaser fly.
  'Tis his with fearless step at large to roam                    370
  Thro' wastes, of Spirits wing'd the solemn home,
  [Q] Thro' vacant worlds where Nature never gave
  A brook to murmur or a bough to wave,
  Which unsubstantial Phantoms sacred keep;
  Thro' worlds where Life and Sound, and Motion sleep,            375
  Where Silence still her death-like reign extends,
  Save when the startling cliff unfrequent rends:
  In the deep snow the mighty ruin drown'd,
  Mocks the dull ear of Time with deaf abortive sound;
 --To mark a planet's pomp and steady light                      380
  In the least star of scarce-appearing night,
  And neighbouring moon, that coasts the vast profound,
  Wheel pale and silent her diminish'd round,
  While far and wide the icy summits blaze
  Rejoicing in the glory of her rays;                             385
  The star of noon that glitters small and bright,
  Shorn of his beams, insufferably white,
  And flying fleet behind his orb to view
  Th' interminable sea of sable blue.
 --Of cloudless suns no more ye frost-built spires               390
  Refract in rainbow hues the restless fires!
  Ye dewy mists the arid rocks o'er-spread
  Whose slippery face derides his deathful tread!

 --To wet the peak's impracticable sides
  He opens of his feet the sanguine tides,                        395
  Weak and more weak the issuing current eyes
  Lapp'd by the panting tongue of thirsty skies. [R]
 --At once bewildering mists around him close,
  And cold and hunger are his least of woes;
  The Demon of the snow with angry roar                           400
  Descending, shuts for aye his prison door.
  Craz'd by the strength of hope at morn he eyes
  As sent from heav'n the raven of the skies,
  Then with despair's whole weight his spirits sink,
  No bread to feed him, and the snow his drink,                   405
  While ere his eyes can close upon the day,
  The eagle of the Alps o'ershades his prey.
 --Meanwhile his wife and child with cruel hope
  All night the door at every moment ope;
  Haply that child in fearful doubt may gaze,                     410
  Passing his father's bones in future days,
  Start at the reliques of that very thigh,
  On which so oft he prattled when a boy.

  Hence shall we turn where, heard with fear afar,
  Thunders thro' echoing pines the headlong Aar?                  415
  Or rather stay to taste the mild delights
  Of pensive [S] Underwalden's pastoral heights?

 --Is there who mid these awful wilds has seen
  The native Genii walk the mountain green?
  Or heard, while other worlds their charms reveal,               420
  Soft music from th' aereal summit steal?
  While o'er the desert, answering every close,
  Rich steam of sweetest perfume comes and goes.
 --And sure there is a secret Power that reigns
  Here, where no trace of man the spot profanes,                  425
  Nought but the herds that pasturing upward creep,
  Hung dim-discover'd from the dangerous steep,
  [T] Or summer hamlet, flat and bare, on high
  Suspended, mid the quiet of the sky.

  How still! no irreligious sound or sight                        430
  Rouzes the soul from her severe delight.
  An idle voice the sabbath region fills
  Of Deep that calls to Deep across the hills,
  Broke only by the melancholy sound
  Of drowsy bells for ever tinkling round;                        435
  Faint wail of eagle melting into blue
  Beneath the cliffs, and pine-woods steady sugh; [U]
  The solitary heifer's deepen'd low;
  Or rumbling heard remote of falling snow.
  Save that, the stranger seen below, the boy                     440
  Shouts from the echoing hills with savage joy.

  When warm from myrtle bays and tranquil seas,
  Comes on, to whisper hope, the [V] vernal breeze,
  When hums the mountain bee in May's glad ear,
  And emerald isles to spot the heights appear,                   445
  When shouts and lowing herds the valley fill,
  And louder torrents stun the noon-tide hill,
  When fragrant scents beneath th' enchanted tread
  Spring up, his little all around him spread,
  The pastoral Swiss begins the cliffs to scale                   450
  To silence leaving the deserted vale,
  Up the green mountain tracking Summer's feet,
  Each twilight earlier call'd the Sun to meet,
  With earlier smile the ray of morn to view
  Fall on his shifting hut that gleams mid smoking dew;           455
  Bless'd with his herds, as in the patriarch's age,
  The summer long to feed from stage to stage;
  O'er azure pikes serene and still, they go,
  And hear the rattling thunder far below;
  Or lost at eve in sudden mist the day                           460
  Attend, or dare with minute-steps their way;
  Hang from the rocks that tremble o'er the steep,
  And tempt the icy valley yawning deep,
  O'er-walk the chasmy torrent's foam-lit bed,
  Rock'd on the dizzy larch's narrow tread,                       465
  Whence Danger leans, and pointing ghastly, joys
  To mock the mind with "desperation's toys";
  Or steal beneath loose mountains, half deterr'd,
  That sigh and shudder to the lowing herd.
 --I see him, up the midway cliff he creeps                      470
  To where a scanty knot of verdure peeps,
  Thence down the steep a pile of grass he throws
  The fodder of his herds in winter snows.
  Far different life to what tradition hoar
  Transmits of days more bless'd in times of yore. [W]            475
  Then Summer lengthen'd out his season bland,
  And with rock-honey flow'd the happy land.
  Continual fountains welling chear'd the waste,
  And plants were wholesome, now of deadly taste.
  Nor Winter yet his frozen stores had pil'd                      480
  Usurping where the fairest herbage smil'd;
  Nor Hunger forc'd the herds from pastures bare
  For scanty food the treacherous cliffs to dare.
  Then the milk-thistle bad those herds demand
  Three times a day the pail and welcome hand.                    485
  But human vices have provok'd the rod
  Of angry Nature to avenge her God.
  Thus does the father to his sons relate,
  On the lone mountain top, their chang'd estate.
  Still, Nature, ever just, to him imparts                        490
  Joys only given to uncorrupted hearts.
 --'Tis morn: with gold the verdant mountain glows,
  More high, the snowy peaks with hues of rose.
  Far stretch'd beneath the many-tinted hills
  A mighty waste of mist the valley fills,                        495
  A solemn sea! whose vales and mountains round
  Stand motionless, to awful silence bound.
  A gulf of gloomy blue, that opens wide
  And bottomless, divides the midway tide.
  Like leaning masts of stranded ships appear                     500
  The pines that near the coast their summits rear;
  Of cabins, woods, and lawns a pleasant shore
  Bounds calm and clear the chaos still and hoar;
  Loud thro' that midway gulf ascending, sound
  Unnumber'd streams with hollow roar profound.                   505
  Mounts thro' the nearer mist the chaunt of birds,
  And talking voices, and the low of herds,
  The bark of dogs, the drowsy tinkling bell,
  And wild-wood mountain lutes of saddest swell.
  Think not, suspended from the cliff on high                     510
  He looks below with undelighted eye.
 --No vulgar joy is his, at even tide
  Stretch'd on the scented mountain's purple side.
  For as the pleasures of his simple day
  Beyond his native valley hardly stray,                          515
  Nought round it's darling precincts can he find
  But brings some past enjoyment to his mind,
  While Hope that ceaseless leans on Pleasure's urn
  Binds her wild wreathes, and whispers his return.

  Once Man entirely free, alone and wild,                         520
  Was bless'd as free--for he was Nature's child.
  He, all superior but his God disdain'd,
  Walk'd none restraining, and by none restrain'd,
  Confess'd no law but what his reason taught,
  Did all he wish'd, and wish'd but what he ought.                525
  As Man in his primaeval dower array'd
  The image of his glorious sire display'd,
  Ev'n so, by vestal Nature guarded, here
  The traces of primaeval Man appear.
  The native dignity no forms debase,                             530
  The eye sublime, and surly lion-grace.
  The slave of none, of beasts alone the lord,
  He marches with his flute, his book, and sword,
  Well taught by that to feel his rights, prepar'd
  With this "the blessings he enjoys to guard."                   535

  And as on glorious ground he draws his breath,
  Where Freedom oft, with Victory and Death,
  Hath seen in grim array amid their Storms
  Mix'd with auxiliar Rocks, three [X] hundred Forms;
  While twice ten thousand corselets at the view                  540
  Dropp'd loud at once, Oppression shriek'd, and flew.
  Oft as those sainted Rocks before him spread,
  An unknown power connects him with the dead.
  For images of other worlds are there,
  Awful the light, and holy is the air.                           545
  Uncertain thro' his fierce uncultur'd soul
  Like lighted tempests troubled transports roll;
  To viewless realms his Spirit towers amain,
  Beyond the senses and their little reign.

  And oft, when pass'd that solemn vision by,                     550
  He holds with God himself communion high,
  When the dread peal of swelling torrents fills
  The sky-roof'd temple of th' eternal hills,
  And savage Nature humbly joins the rite,
  While flash her upward eyes severe delight.                     555
  Or gazing from the mountain's silent brow,
  Bright stars of ice and azure worlds of snow,
  Where needle peaks of granite shooting bare
  Tremble in ever-varying tints of air,
  Great joy by horror tam'd dilates his heart,                    560
  And the near heav'ns their own delights impart.
 --When the Sun bids the gorgeous scene farewell,
  Alps overlooking Alps their state upswell;
  Huge Pikes of Darkness nam'd, of [Y] Fear and Storms
  Lift, all serene, their still, illumin'd forms,                 565
  In sea-like reach of prospect round him spread,
  Ting'd like an angel's smile all rosy red.

  When downward to his winter hut he goes,
  Dear and more dear the lessening circle grows,
  That hut which from the hills his eyes employs                  570
  So oft, the central point of all his joys.
  And as a swift by tender cares oppress'd
  Peeps often ere she dart into her nest,
  So to th' untrodden floor, where round him looks
  His father helpless as the babe he rocks,                       575
  Oft he descends to nurse the brother pair,
  Till storm and driving ice blockade him there;
  There hears, protected by the woods behind,
  Secure, the chiding of the baffled wind,
  Hears Winter, calling all his Terrors round,                    580
  Rush down the living rocks with whirlwind sound.

  Thro' Nature's vale his homely pleasures glide
  Unstain'd by envy, discontent, and pride,
  The bound of all his vanity to deck
  With one bright bell a favourite heifer's neck;                 585
  Content upon some simple annual feast,
  Remember'd half the year, and hop'd the rest,
  If dairy produce, from his inner hoard,
  Of thrice ten summers consecrate the board.
 --Alas! in every clime a flying ray                             590
  Is all we have to chear our wintry way,
  Condemn'd, in mists and tempests ever rife,
  To pant slow up the endless Alp of life.
  "Here," cried a swain, whose venerable head
  Bloom'd with the snow-drops of Man's narrow bed,                595
  Last night, while by his dying fire, as clos'd
  The day, in luxury my limbs repos'd,
  "Here Penury oft from misery's mount will guide
  Ev'n to the summer door his icy tide,
  And here the avalanche of Death destroy                         600
  The little cottage of domestic Joy.
  But, ah! th' unwilling mind may more than trace
  The general sorrows of the human race:
  The churlish gales, that unremitting blow
  Cold from necessity's continual snow,                           605
  To us the gentle groups of bliss deny
  That on the noon-day bank of leisure lie.
  Yet more; the tyrant Genius, still at strife
  With all the tender Charities of life,
  When close and closer they begin to strain,                     610
  No fond hand left to staunch th' unclosing vein,
  Tearing their bleeding ties leaves Age to groan
  On his wet bed, abandon'd and alone.
  For ever, fast as they of strength become
  To pay the filial debt, for food to roam,                       615
  The father, forc'd by Powers that only deign
  That solitary Man disturb their reign,
  From his bare nest amid the storms of heaven
  Drives, eagle-like, his sons as he was driven,
  His last dread pleasure! watches to the plain--                620
  And never, eagle-like, beholds again." [Z]

  When the poor heart has all its joys resign'd,
  Why does their sad remembrance cleave behind?
  Lo! by the lazy Seine the exile roves,
  Or where thick sails illume Batavia's groves;                   625
  Soft o'er the waters mournful measures swell,
  Unlocking bleeding Thought's "memorial cell";
  At once upon his heart Despair has set
  Her seal, the mortal tear his cheek has wet;
  Strong poison not a form of steel can brave                     630
  Bows his young hairs with sorrow to the grave.
    Gay lark of hope thy silent song resume!
  Fair smiling lights the purpled hills illume!
  Soft gales and dews of life's delicious morn,
  And thou, lost fragrance of the heart return!                   635
  [Aa] Soon flies the little joy to man allow'd,
  And tears before him travel like a cloud.
  For come Diseases on, and Penury's rage,
  Labour, and Pain, and Grief, and joyless Age,
  And Conscience dogging close his bleeding way                   640
  Cries out, and leads her Spectres to their prey,
  'Till Hope-deserted, long in vain his breath
  Implores the dreadful untried sleep of Death.
 --Mid savage rocks and seas of snow that shine
  Between interminable tracts of pine,                            645
  Round a lone fane the human Genii mourn,
  Where fierce the rays of woe collected burn.
 --From viewless lamps a ghastly dimness falls,
  And ebbs uncertain on the troubled walls,
  Dim dreadful faces thro' the gloom appear,                      650
  Abortive Joy, and Hope that works in fear,
  While strives a secret Power to hush the crowd,
  Pain's wild rebellious burst proclaims her rights aloud.
    Oh give not me that eye of hard disdain
  That views undimm'd Einsiedlen's [Bb] wretched fane.            655
  Mid muttering prayers all sounds of torment meet,
  Dire clap of hands, distracted chafe of feet,
  While loud and dull ascends the weeping cry,
  Surely in other thoughts contempt may die.
  If the sad grave of human ignorance bear                        660
  One flower of hope--Oh pass and leave it there.

 --The tall Sun, tiptoe on an Alpine spire,
  Flings o'er the desert blood-red streams of fire.
  At such an hour there are who love to stray,
  And meet the gladdening pilgrims on their way.                  665
 --Now with joy's tearful kiss each other greet,
  Nor longer naked be your way-worn feet,
  For ye have reach'd at last that happy shore,
  Where the charm'd worm of pain shall gnaw no more.
  How gayly murmur and how sweetly taste                          670
  The [Cc] fountains rear'd for you amid the waste!
  Yes I will see you when ye first behold
  Those turrets tipp'd by hope with morning gold,
  And watch, while on your brows the cross ye make,
  Round your pale eyes a wintry lustre wake.                      675
 --Without one hope her written griefs to blot,
  Save in the land where all things are forgot,
  My heart, alive to transports long unknown,
  Half wishes your delusion were it's own.

  Last let us turn to where Chamouny [Dd] shields,                680
  Bosom'd in gloomy woods, her golden fields,
  Five streams of ice amid her cots descend,
  And with wild flowers and blooming orchards blend,
  A scene more fair than what the Grecian feigns
  Of purple lights and ever vernal plains.                        685
  Here lawns and shades by breezy rivulets fann'd,
  Here all the Seasons revel hand in hand,
 --Red stream the cottage lights; the landscape fades,
  Erroneous wavering mid the twilight shades.
  Alone ascends that mountain nam'd of white, [Ee]                690
  That dallies with the Sun the summer night.
  Six thousand years amid his lonely bounds
  The voice of Ruin, day and night, resounds.
  Where Horror-led his sea of ice assails,
  Havoc and Chaos blast a thousand vales,                         695
  In waves, like two enormous serpents, wind
  And drag their length of deluge train behind.
  Between the pines enormous boughs descry'd
  Serene he towers, in deepest purple dy'd;
  Glad Day-light laughs upon his top of snow,                     700
  Glitter the stars above, and all is black below.

  At such an hour I heav'd the human sigh,
  When roar'd the sullen Arve in anger by,
  That not for thee, delicious vale! unfold
  Thy reddening orchards, and thy fields of gold;                 705
  That thou, the [Ff] slave of slaves, art doom'd to pine,
  While no Italian arts their charms combine
  To teach the skirt of thy dark cloud to shine;
  For thy poor babes that, hurrying from the door,
  With pale-blue hands, and eyes that fix'd implore,              710
  Dead muttering lips, and hair of hungry white,
  Besiege the traveller whom they half affright.
 --Yes, were it mine, the cottage meal to share
  Forc'd from my native mountains bleak and bare;
  O'er [Gg] Anet's hopeless seas of marsh to stray,               715
  Her shrill winds roaring round my lonely way;
  To scent the sweets of Piedmont's breathing rose,
  And orange gale that o'er Lugano blows;
  In the wide range of many a weary round,
  Still have my pilgrim feet unfailing found,                     720
  As despot courts their blaze of gems display,
  Ev'n by the secret cottage far away
  The lilly of domestic joy decay;
  While Freedom's farthest hamlets blessings share,
  Found still beneath her smile, and only there.                  725
  The casement shade more luscious woodbine binds,
  And to the door a neater pathway winds,
  At early morn the careful housewife, led
  To cull her dinner from it's garden bed,
  Of weedless herbs a healthier prospect sees,                    730
  While hum with busier joy her happy bees;
  In brighter rows her table wealth aspires,
  And laugh with merrier blaze her evening fires;
  Her infant's cheeks with fresher roses glow,
  And wilder graces sport around their brow;                      735
  By clearer taper lit a cleanlier board
  Receives at supper hour her tempting hoard;
  The chamber hearth with fresher boughs is spread,
  And whiter is the hospitable bed.

 --And thou! fair favoured region! which my soul                 740
  Shall love, till Life has broke her golden bowl,
  Till Death's cold touch her cistern-wheel assail,
  And vain regret and vain desire shall fail;
  Tho' now, where erst the grey-clad peasant stray'd,
  To break the quiet of the village shade                         745
  Gleam war's [Hh] discordant habits thro' the trees,
  And the red banner mock the sullen breeze;
  Tho' now no more thy maids their voices suit
  To the low-warbled breath of twilight lute,
  And heard, the pausing village hum between,                     750
  No solemn songstress lull the fading green,
  Scared by the fife, and rumbling drum's alarms,
  And the short thunder, and the flash of arms;
  While, as Night bids the startling uproar die,
  Sole sound, the [Ii] sourd renews his mournful cry:             755
 --Yet, hast thou found that Freedom spreads her pow'r
  Beyond the cottage hearth, the cottage door:
  All nature smiles; and owns beneath her eyes
  Her fields peculiar, and peculiar skies.
  Yes, as I roam'd where Loiret's [Jj] waters glide               760
  Thro' rustling aspins heard from side to side,
  When from October clouds a milder light
  Fell, where the blue flood rippled into white,
  Methought from every cot the watchful bird
  Crowed with ear-piercing power 'till then unheard;              765
  Each clacking mill, that broke the murmuring streams,
  Rock'd the charm'd thought in more delightful dreams;
  Chasing those long long dreams the falling leaf
  Awoke a fainter pang of moral grief;
  The measured echo of the distant flail                          770
  Winded in sweeter cadence down the vale;
  A more majestic tide the [Kk] water roll'd,
  And glowed the sun-gilt groves in richer gold:

 --Tho' Liberty shall soon, indignant, raise
  Red on his hills his beacon's comet blaze;                      775
  Bid from on high his lonely cannon sound,
  And on ten thousand hearths his shout rebound;
  His larum-bell from village-tow'r to tow'r
  Swing on th' astounded ear it's dull undying roar:
  Yet, yet rejoice, tho' Pride's perverted ire                    780
  Rouze Hell's own aid, and wrap thy hills in fire.
  Lo! from th' innocuous flames, a lovely birth!
  With it's own Virtues springs another earth:
  Nature, as in her prime, her virgin reign
  Begins, and Love and Truth compose her train;                   785
  With pulseless hand, and fix'd unwearied gaze,
  Unbreathing Justice her still beam surveys:
  No more, along thy vales and viny groves,
  Whole hamlets disappearing as he moves,
  With cheeks o'erspread by smiles of baleful glow,               790
  On his pale horse shall fell Consumption go.

  Oh give, great God, to Freedom's waves to ride
  Sublime o'er Conquest, Avarice, and Pride,
  To break, the vales where Death with Famine scow'rs,
  And dark Oppression builds her thick-ribb'd tow'rs;             795
  Where Machination her fell soul resigns,
  Fled panting to the centre of her mines;
  Where Persecution decks with ghastly smiles
  Her bed, his mountains mad Ambition piles;
  Where Discord stalks dilating, every hour,                      800
  And crouching fearful at the feet of Pow'r,
  Like Lightnings eager for th' almighty word,
  Look up for sign of havoc, Fire, and Sword; [Ll]
 --Give them, beneath their breast while Gladness springs,
  To brood the nations o'er with Nile-like wings;                 805
  And grant that every sceptred child of clay,
  Who cries, presumptuous, "here their tides shall stay,"
  Swept in their anger from th' affrighted shore,
  With all his creatures sink--to rise no more.
    To-night, my friend, within this humble cot                   810
  Be the dead load of mortal ills forgot,
  Renewing, when the rosy summits glow
  At morn, our various journey, sad and slow.





FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: All the notes to this reprint of the edition of 1793 are
Wordsworth's own, as given in that edition.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: The lyre of Memnon is reported to have emitted melancholy
or chearful tones, as it was touched by the sun's evening or morning
rays.]


[Footnote C: There are few people whom it may be necessary to inform,
that the sides of many of the post-roads in France are planted with a
row of trees.]


[Footnote D: Alluding to crosses seen on the tops of the spiry rocks of
the Chartreuse, which have every appearance of being inaccessible.]


[Footnote E: Names of rivers at the Chartreuse.]


[Footnote F: Name of one of the vallies of the Chartreuse.]


[Footnote G: If any of my readers should ever visit the Lake of Como, I
recommend it to him to take a stroll along this charming little pathway:
he must chuse the evening, as it is on the western side of the Lake. We
pursued it from the foot of the water to it's head: it is once
interrupted by a ferry.]


[Footnote H:

  Solo, e pensoso i piu deserti campi
  Vo misurando a passi tardi, e lenti.
'Petrarch'.]


[Footnote I: The river along whose banks you descend in crossing the
Alps by the Semplon pass. From the striking contrast of it's features,
this pass I should imagine to be the most interesting among the Alps.]


[Footnote J: Most of the bridges among the Alps are of wood and covered:
these bridges have a heavy appearance, and rather injure the effect of
the scenery in some places.]


[Footnote K:

  "Red came the river down, and loud, and oft
  The angry Spirit of the water shriek'd."

HOME'S 'Douglas'.]


[Footnote L: The Catholic religion prevails here, these cells are, as is
well known, very common in the Catholic countries, planted, like the
Roman tombs, along the road side.]


[Footnote M: Crosses commemorative of the deaths of travellers by the
fall of snow and other accidents very common along this dreadful road.]


[Footnote N: The houses in the more retired Swiss valleys are all built
of wood.]


[Footnote O: I had once given to these sketches the title of
Picturesque; but the Alps are insulted in applying to them that term.
Whoever, in attempting to describe their sublime features, should
confine himself to the cold rules of painting would give his reader but
a very imperfect idea of those emotions which they have the irresistible
power of communicating to the most impassive imaginations. The fact is,
that controuling influence, which distinguishes the Alps from all other
scenery, is derived from images which disdain the pencil. Had I wished
to make a picture of this scene I had thrown much less light into it.
But I consulted nature and my feelings. The ideas excited by the stormy
sunset I am here describing owed their sublimity to that deluge of
light, or rather of fire, in which nature had wrapped the immense forms
around me; any intrusion of shade, by destroying the unity of the
impression, had necessarily diminished its grandeur.]


[Footnote P: Pike is a word very commonly used in the north of England,
to signify a high mountain of the conic form, as Langdale pike, etc.]


[Footnote Q: For most of the images in the next sixteen verses I am
indebted to M. Raymond's interesting observations annexed to his
translation of Coxe's 'Tour in Switzerland'.]


[Footnote R: The rays of the sun drying the rocks frequently produce on
their surface a dust so subtile and slippery, that the wretched
chamois-chasers are obliged to bleed themselves in the legs and feet in
order to secure a footing.]


[Footnote S: The people of this Canton are supposed to be of a more
melancholy disposition than the other inhabitants of the Alps: this, if
true, may proceed from their living more secluded.]


[Footnote T: These summer hamlets are most probably (as I have seen
observed by a critic in the 'Gentleman's Magazine') what Virgil alludes
to in the expression "Castella in tumulis."]


[Footnote U: Sugh, a Scotch word expressive of the sound of the wind
through the trees.]


[Footnote V: This wind, which announces the spring to the Swiss, is
called in their language Foen; and is according to M. Raymond the Syroco
of the Italians.]


[Footnote W: This tradition of the golden age of the Alps, as M. Raymond
observes, is highly interesting, interesting not less to the philosopher
than to the poet. Here I cannot help remarking, that the superstitions
of the Alps appear to be far from possessing that poetical character
which so eminently distinguishes those of Scotland and the other
mountainous northern countries. The Devil with his horns, etc., seems to
be in their idea, the principal agent that brings about the sublime
natural revolutions that take place daily before their eyes.]


[Footnote X: Alluding to several battles which the Swiss in very small
numbers have gained over their oppressors the house of Austria; and in
particular, to one fought at Naeffels near Glarus, where three hundred
and thirty men defeated an army of between fifteen and twenty thousand
Austrians. Scattered over the valley are to be found eleven stones, with
this inscription, 1388, the year the battle was fought, marking out as I
was told upon the spot, the several places where the Austrians
attempting to make a stand were repulsed anew.]


[Footnote Y: As Schreck-Horn, the pike of terror. Wetter-Horn, the pike
of storms, etc. etc.]


[Footnote Z: The effect of the famous air called in French Ranz des
Vaches upon the Swiss troops removed from their native country is well
known, as also the injunction of not playing it on pain of death, before
the regiments of that nation, in the service of France and Holland.]


[Footnote Aa: Optima quaeque dies, etc.]


[Footnote Bb: This shrine is resorted to, from a hope of relief, by
multitudes, from every corner of the Catholick world, labouring under
mental or bodily afflictions.]


[Footnote Cc: Rude fountains built and covered with sheds for the
accommodation of the pilgrims, in their ascent of the mountain. Under
these sheds the sentimental traveller and the philosopher may find
interesting sources of meditation.]


[Footnote Dd: This word is pronounced upon the spot Chamouny, I have
taken the liberty of reading it long thinking it more musical.]


[Footnote Ee: It is only from the higher part of the valley of Chamouny
that Mont Blanc is visible.]


[Footnote Ff: It is scarce necessary to observe that these lines were
written before the emancipation of Savoy.]


[Footnote Gg: A vast extent of marsh so called near the lake of
Neuf-chatel.]


[Footnote Hh: This, as may be supposed, was written before France became
the seat of war.]


[Footnote Ii: An insect so called, which emits a short, melancholy cry,
heard, at the close of the summer evenings, on the banks of the Loire.]


[Footnote Jj: The river Loiret, which has the honour of giving name to a
department, rises out of the earth at a place, called La Source, a
league and a half south-east of Orleans, and taking at once the
character of a considerable stream, winds under a most delicious bank on
its left, with a flat country of meadows, woods, and vineyards on its
right, till it falls into the Loire about three or four leagues below
Orleans. The hand of false taste has committed on its banks those
outrages which the Abbe de Lille so pathetically deprecates in those
charming verses descriptive of the Seine, visiting in secret the retreat
of his friend Watelet. Much as the Loiret, in its short course, suffers
from injudicious ornament, yet are there spots to be found upon its
banks as soothing as meditation could wish for: the curious traveller
may meet with some of them where it loses itself among the mills in the
neighbourhood of the villa called La Fontaine. The walks of La Source,
where it takes its rise, may, in the eyes of some people, derive an
additional interest from the recollection that they were the retreat of
Bolingbroke during his exile, and that here it was that his
philosophical works were chiefly composed. The inscriptions, of which he
speaks in one of his letters to Swift descriptive of this spot, are not,
I believe, now extant. The gardens have been modelled within these
twenty years according to a plan evidently not dictated by the taste of
the friend of Pope.]


[Footnote Kk: The duties upon many parts of the French rivers were so
exorbitant that the poorer people, deprived of the benefit of water
carriage, were obliged to transport their goods by land.]


[Footnote Ll:

         --And, at his heels,
  Leash'd in like hounds, should Famine, Sword, and Fire,
  Crouch for employment.]





       *       *       *       *       *





APPENDIX II

The following is Wordsworth's Itinerary of the Tour, taken by him and
his friend Jones, which gave rise to 'Descriptive Sketches'.


July
13. Calais.
14. Ardres.
17. Peronne.
18. Village near Coucy.
19. Soissons.
20. Chateau Thierry.
21. Sezanne.
22. Village near Troyes.
23. Bar-le-Duc.
24. Chatillon-sur-Seine.
26. Nuits.
27. Chalons.
28. Chalons.
29. On the Saone.
30. Lyons.
31. Condrieu.

August
 1. Moreau.
 2. Voreppe.
 3. Village near Chartreuse.
 4. Chartreuse.
 6. Aix.
 7. Town in Savoy.
 8. Town on Lake of Geneva.
 9. Lausanne.
10. Villeneuve.
11. St. Maurice in the Valais.
12. Chamouny.
13. Chamouny.
14. Martigny.
15. Village beyond Sion.
16. Brieg.
17. Spital on Alps.
18. Margozza.
19. Village beyond Lago Maggiore.
20. Village on Lago di Como.
21. Village beyond Gravedona.
22. Jones at Chiavenna; W. W. at Samolaco.
23. Sovozza.
24. Splugen.
25. Flems.
26. Dissentis.
27. Village on the Reuss.
28. Fluelen.
29. Lucerne.
30. Village on the Lake of Zurich.
31. Einsiedlen.


September

1. Glarus.
2. Glarus.
3. Village beyond Lake of  Wallenstadt.
4. Village on road to Appenzell.
5. Appenzell.
6. Keswill, on Lake of Constance.
7. On the Rhine.
8. On the Rhine.
9. On road to Lucerne.
10. Lucerne.
11. Saxeln.
12. Village on the Aar.
13. Grindelwald.
14. Lauterbrunnen.
15. Village three leagues from Berne.
16. Avranches.
19. Village beyond Pierre Pertuises.
20. Village four leagues from Basle.
21. Basle.
22. Town six leagues from Strasburg.
23. Spires.
24. Village on Rhine.
25. Mentz. Mayence.
27. Village on Rhine, two leagues from Coblentz.
28. Cologne.
29. Village three leagues from Aix-la-Chapelle.


The pedestrians bought a boat at Basle, and in it floated down the Rhine
as far as Cologne, intending to proceed in the same way to Ostend; but
they returned to England from Cologne by Calais. In the course of this
tour, Wordsworth wrote a letter to his sister, dated "Sept. 6, 1790,
Keswill, a small village on the Lake of Constance," which will be found
amongst his letters in a subsequent volume.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





APPENDIX III

The following two variants in 'Descriptive Sketches' are from MS. notes
written in the late Lord Coleridge's copy of the edition of 1836-7.

l. 247.

    Yet the world's business hither finds its way
    At times, and unsought tales beguile the day,
    And tender thoughts are those which Solitude


l. 249.

    Yet tender thoughts dwell there. No Solitude
    Hath power Youth's natural feelings to exclude.





       *       *       *       *       *





APPENDIX IV

'Anecdote for Fathers'

See Eusebius' 'Praeparatio Evangelica', vi. 5.--[Greek:  kleie bi_en
kartos te log_on pseud_egora lex_o]--which was Apollo's answer to
certain persons who tried to force his oracle to reply.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





APPENDIX V

'The Thorn'

William Taylor's translation of Burger's 'Pfarrer's Tochter' appeared in
'The Monthly Magazine' (1796), and as the same volume contained
contributions by Coleridge and Lamb, it is possible that Wordsworth saw
it. Burger's Pastor's Daughter murdered her natural child, but it is her
ghost which haunts its grave, which she had torn

  With bleeding nails beside the pond,
  And nightly pines the pool beside.





       *       *       *       *       *





APPENDIX VI

'Simon Lee'

It was found impossible fully to describe, within the limits of a
footnote, the endless shiftings to and fro of the stanzas and half
stanzas of 'Simon Lee'. The first eight stanzas of the edition of 1798
are therefore reprinted in this Appendix; and a Table is added, by means
of which the various transpositions effected from time to time may be
readily ascertained. In the Table 'a' stands for lines 1-4, and 'b' for
lines 5-8 of a stanza.


  In the sweet shire of Cardigan,
  Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall,
  An old man dwells, a little man,
  I've heard he once was tall.
  Of years he has upon his back,
  No doubt, a burthen weighty;
  He says he is three score and ten,
  But others say he's eighty.

  A long blue livery-coat has he,
  That's fair behind, and fair before;
  Yet, meet him where you will, you see
  At once that he is poor.
  Full five and twenty years he lived
  A running huntsman merry;
  And, though he has but one eye left,
  His cheek is like a cherry.

  No man like him the horn could sound,
  And no man was so full of glee;
  To say the least, four counties round
  Had heard of Simon Lee;
  His master's dead, and no one now
  Dwells in the hall of Ivor;
  Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead;
  He is the sole survivor.

  His hunting feats have him bereft
  Of his right eye, as you may see:
  And then, what limbs those feats have left
  To poor old Simon Lee!
  He has no son, he has no child,
  His wife, an aged woman,
  Lives with him, near the waterfall,
  Upon the village common.

  And he is lean and he is sick,
  His little body's half awry
  His ancles they are swoln and thick;
  His legs are thin and dry.
  When he was young he little knew
  Of husbandry or tillage;
  And now he's forced to work, though weak,
 --The weakest in the village.

  He all the country could outrun,
  Could leave both man and horse behind;
  And often, ere the race was done,
  He reeled and was stone-blind.
  And still there's something in the world
  At which his heart rejoices;
  For when the chiming hounds are out,
  He dearly loves their voices!

  Old Ruth works out of doors with him,
  And does what Simon cannot do;
  For she, not over stout of limb,
  Is stouter of the two.
  And though you with your utmost skill
  From labour could not wean them,
  Alas! 'tis very little, all
  Which they can do between them.

  Beside their moss-grown hut of clay,
  Not twenty paces from the door,
  A scrap of land they have, but they
  Are poorest of the poor.
  This scrap of land he from the heath
  Enclosed when he was stronger;
  But what avails the land to them,
  Which they can till no longer?



Editions       Editions       Edition       Edition       Editions
1798 and 1800. 1802-1815.     1820.         1827.         1832-1849.

   1              1            1 a           1 a            1 a
                               2 b           2 b            2 b

   2              2            3             4 a            3 a
                                             3 b            5 b

   3              3            4 a           3 a            6
                               5 b           5 b

   4              6            6             6              4 a
                                                            3 b

   5              4            5 a           5 a            5 a
                               4 b           4 b            4 b

   6              5            7             8              8

   7              7            8             7              7

   8              8            9             9              9





APPENDIX VII

'Lines written in Early Spring', ll. 11, 12

Compare the 'Laws of Manu', i. 49:

  "Vegetables, as well as animals, have internal consciousness, and are
  sensible of pleasure and pain."

This I have received from a correspondent, but I have never seen the
English version.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





APPENDIX VIII

'An Evening Walk'


(1) l. 219,

    "His neck, a varying arch, between his towering wings."

Compare 'Paradise Lost', book vii. l. 438.


(2) l. 286, in the footnote reading of 1793, the line occurs

    "Or clock, that blind against the wanderer borne."

This refers to the winged beetle, the buzzard-clock.


(3) l. 323, "The bird, etc." The owl. Compare Cowper's 'Task', i. ll.
205, 206.


END OF VOL. I.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of William
Wordsworth, Edited by William Knight

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POETRY OF WORDSWORTH ***

***** This file should be named 10219-8.txt or 10219-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/1/10219/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Clytie Siddall and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

?The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth,
Vol. II., by William Wordsworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth, Vol. II.

Author: William Wordsworth

Release Date: April 26, 2004 [EBook #12145]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORDSWORTH, VOL. II. ***




Produced by Jonathon Ingram, Clytie Siddall and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team!





                              THE POETICAL WORKS

                                     OF



                              WILLIAM WORDSWORTH





                                  EDITED BY
                               WILLIAM KNIGHT


                                   VOL. II


                                    1896






CONTENTS



Peter Bell

Lines, composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey, on revisiting the Banks
of the Wye during a tour, July 13, 1798

There was a Boy

The Two Thieves; or, the Last Stage of Avarice

Written with a Slate Pencil upon a Stone, the largest of a Heap lying
near a Deserted Quarry, upon one of the Islands at Rydal


1799

  Influence of Natural Objects in calling forth and strengthening the
  Imagination in Boyhood and Early Youth

  The Simplon Pass

  Nutting

  Written in Germany, on one of the Coldest Days of the Century

  A Poet's Epitaph

  "Strange fits of passion have I known"

  "She dwelt among the untrodden ways"

  "I travelled among unknown men"

  "Three years she grew in sun and shower"

  "A slumber did my spirit seal"

  Address to the Scholars of the Village School of----

  Matthew

  The Two April Mornings

  The Fountain

  To a Sexton

  The Danish Boy

  Lucy Gray; or, Solitude

  Ruth


1800

  "On Nature's invitation do I come"

  "Bleak season was it, turbulent and bleak"

  Ellen Irwin; or, The Braes of Kirtle

  Hart-Leap Well

  The Idle Shepherd-Boys; or, Dungeon-Ghyll Force

  The Pet-Lamb

  The Farmer of Tilsbury Vale


Poems on the Naming of Places:

  "It was an April morning: fresh and clear"

  To Joanna

  "There is an Eminence,--of these our hills"

  "A narrow girdle of rough stones and crags"

  To M. H.

  The Waterfall and the Eglantine

  The Oak and the Broom

  "'Tis said, that some have died for love"

  The Childless Father

  Song for the Wandering Jew

  The Brothers

  The Seven Sisters; or, The Solitude of Binnorie

  Rural Architecture

  A Character

  Inscription for the spot where the Hermitage stood on St. Herbert's
  Island, Derwent-Water

  Written with a Pencil upon a Stone in the Wall of the House (an
  Out-House), on the Island at Grasmere

  Michael


1801

  The Sparrow's Nest

  "Pelion and Ossa flourish side by side"

  Selections from Chaucer Modernised:

    The Prioress' Tale

    The Cuckoo and the Nightingale

    Troilus and Cresida

1802

  The Sailor's Mother

  Alice Fell; or, Poverty

  Beggars

  Sequel to the Foregoing

  To a Butterfly

  The Emigrant Mother

  To the Cuckoo

  "My heart leaps up when I behold"

  Written in March, while resting on the Bridge at the Foot of Brothers
  Water

  The Redbreast chasing the Butterfly

  To a Butterfly

  Foresight

  To the Small Celandine

  To the Same Flower

  Stanzas written in my Pocket Copy of Thomson's "Castle of Indolence"

  Resolution and Independence

  "I grieved for Buonaparte"

  A Farewell

  "The sun has long been set"

  Composed upon Westminster Bridge, September 3, 1802

  Composed by the Sea-side, near Calais, August, 1802

  Calais, August, 1802

  Composed near Calais, on the Road leading to Ardres, August 7, 1802

  Calais, August 15, 1802

  "It is a beauteous evening, calm and free"

  On the Extinction of the Venetian Republic

  The King of Sweden

  To Toussaint L'Ouverture

  Composed in the Valley near Dover, on the Day of Landing

  September 1, 1802

  September, 1802, near Dover

  Written in London, September, 1802

  London, 1802

  "Great men have been among us; hands that penned"

  "It is not to be thought of that the Flood"

  "When I have borne in memory what has tamed"

  Composed after a Journey across the Hambleton Hills, Yorkshire

  To H. C.

  To the Daisy

  To the Same Flower

  To the Daisy

  Louisa

  To a Young Lady, who had been Reproached for taking Long Walks in the
  Country

1803

  The Green Linnet

  Yew-Trees

  "Who fancied what a pretty sight"

  "It is no Spirit who from heaven hath flown"

  Memorials of a Tour in Scotland:

    Departure from the Vale of Grasmere. August, 1803

    At the Grave of Burns, 1803. Seven Years after his Death

    Thoughts suggested the Day following, on the Banks of Nith, near the
    Poet's Residence

    To the Sons of Burns, after Visiting the Grave of their Father

    To a Highland Girl

    Glen-Almain; or, The Narrow Glen

    Stepping Westward

    The Solitary Reaper

    Address to Kilchurn Castle

    Rob Roy's Grave

    Sonnet composed at----Castle

    Yarrow Unvisited

    The Matron of Jedborough and her Husband

    "Fly, some kind Harbinger, to Grasmere-dale"

    The Blind Highland Boy

October, 1803

"There is a bondage worse, far worse, to bear"

October, 1803

"England! the time is come when thou should'st wean"

October, 1803

To the Men of Kent. October, 1803

In the Pass of Killicranky

Anticipation. October, 1803

Lines on the Expected Invasion, 1803





       *       *       *       *       *





                     WORDSWORTH'S POETICAL WORKS





       *       *       *       *       *





PETER BELL: A TALE [A]


Composed 1798. [B]--Published 1819.


  'What's in a Name?' [C]

  'Brutus will start a Spirit as soon as Caesar!' [D]


  To ROBERT SOUTHEY, ESQ., P.L., ETC., ETC.

  MY DEAR FRIEND--The Tale of 'Peter Bell', which I now introduce to
  your notice, and to that of the Public, has, in its Manuscript state,
  nearly survived its _minority_:--for it first saw the light in the
  summer of 1798. During this long interval, pains have been taken at
  different times to make the production less unworthy of a favourable
  reception; or, rather, to fit it for filling _permanently_ a station,
  however humble, in the Literature of our Country. This has, indeed,
  been the aim of all my endeavours in Poetry, which, you know, have
  been sufficiently laborious to prove that I deem the Art not lightly
  to be approached; and that the attainment of excellence in it, may
  laudably be made the principal object of intellectual pursuit by any
  man, who, with reasonable consideration of circumstances, has faith in
  his own impulses.

  The Poem of 'Peter Bell', as the Prologue will show, was composed
  under a belief that the Imagination not only does not require for its
  exercise the intervention of supernatural agency, but that, though
  such agency be excluded, the faculty may be called forth as
  imperiously and for kindred results of pleasure, by incidents, within
  the compass of poetic probability, in the humblest departments of
  daily life. Since that Prologue was written, _you_ have exhibited most
  splendid effects of judicious daring, in the opposite and usual
  course. Let this acknowledgment make my peace with the lovers of the
  supernatural; and I am persuaded it will be admitted, that to you, as
  a Master in that province of the art, the following Tale, whether from
  contrast or congruity, is not an unappropriate offering. Accept it,
  then, as a public testimony of affectionate admiration from one with
  whose name yours has been often coupled (to use your own words) for
  evil and for good; and believe me to be, with earnest wishes that life
  and health may be granted you to complete the many important works in
  which you are engaged, and with high respect, Most faithfully yours,

  WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.

  RYDAL MOUNT, April 7, 1819.


[Written at Alfoxden. Founded upon an anecdote which I read in a
newspaper, of an ass being found hanging his head over a canal in a
wretched posture. Upon examination a dead body was found in the water,
and proved to be the body of its master. The countenance, gait, and
figure of Peter were taken from a wild rover with whom I walked from
Builth, on the river Wye, downwards, nearly as far as the town of Hay.
He told me strange stories. It has always been a pleasure to me through
life, to catch at every opportunity that has occurred in my rambles of
becoming acquainted with this class of people. The number of Peter's
wives was taken from the trespasses, in this way, of a lawless creature,
who lived in the county of Durham, and used to be attended by many
women, sometimes not less than half a dozen, as disorderly as himself,
and a story went in the country that he had been heard to say, while
they were quarrelling, "Why can't ye be quiet, there's none so many of
you?" Benoni, or the child of sorrow, I knew when I was a schoolboy. His
mother had been deserted by a gentleman in the neighbourhood, she
herself being a gentlewoman by birth. The circumstances of her story
were told me by my dear old dame, Ann Tyson, who was her confidante. The
lady died broken-hearted. In the woods of Alfoxden I used to take great
delight in noticing the habits, tricks, and physiognomy of asses; and I
have no doubt that I was thus put upon writing the poem out of liking
for the creature that is often so dreadfully abused. The crescent moon,
which makes such a figure in the prologue, assumed this character one
evening while I was watching its beauty in front of Alfoxden House. I
intended this poem for the volume before spoken of, but it was not
published for more than twenty years afterwards. The worship of the
Methodists, or Ranters, is often heard during the stillness of the
summer evening, in the country, with affecting accompaniments of rural
beauty. In both the psalmody and voice of the preacher there is, not
unfrequently, much solemnity likely to impress the feelings of the
rudest characters under favourable circumstances.--I. F.]


Classed by Wordsworth among his "Poems of the Imagination."--ED.



PROLOGUE

  There's something in a flying horse,
  There's something [1] in a huge balloon;
  But through the clouds I'll never float
  Until I have a little Boat,
  Shaped like [2] the crescent-moon.                         5

  And now I _have_ a little Boat,
  In shape a very crescent-moon:
  Fast through the clouds my boat can sail;
  But if perchance your faith should fail,
  Look up--and you shall see me soon!                       10

  The woods, my Friends, are round you roaring,
  Rocking and roaring like a sea;
  The noise of danger's in [3] your ears,
  And ye have all a thousand fears
  Both for my little Boat and me!                           15

  Meanwhile untroubled I admire [4]
  The pointed horns of my canoe;
  And, did not pity touch my breast,
  To see how ye are all distrest,
  Till my ribs ached, I'd laugh at you!                     20

  Away we go, my Boat and I--
  Frail man ne'er sate in such another;
  Whether among the winds we strive,
  Or deep into the clouds [5] we dive,
  Each is contented with the other.                         25

  Away we go--and what care we
  For treasons, tumults, and for wars?
  We are as calm in our delight
  As is the crescent-moon so bright
  Among the scattered stars.                                30

  Up goes my Boat among [6] the stars
  Through many a breathless field of light,
  Through many a long blue field of ether,
  Leaving ten thousand stars beneath her:
  Up goes my little Boat so bright!                         35

  The Crab, the Scorpion, and the Bull--
  We pry among them all; have shot
  High o'er the red-haired race of Mars,
  Covered from top to toe with scars;
  Such company I like it not!                               40

  The towns in Saturn are decayed,
  And melancholy Spectres throng them;--[7]
  The Pleiads, that appear to kiss
  Each other in the vast abyss,
  With joy I sail among [8] them,                           45

  Swift Mercury resounds with mirth,
  Great Jove is full of stately bowers;
  But these, and all that they contain,
  What are they to that tiny grain,
  That little Earth [9] of ours?                            50

  Then back to Earth, the dear green Earth:--
  Whole ages if I here should roam,
  The world for my remarks and me
  Would not a whit the better be;
  I've left my heart at home.                               55

  See! there she is, [10] the matchless Earth!
  There spreads the famed Pacific Ocean!
  Old Andes thrusts yon craggy spear
  Through the grey clouds; the Alps are here,
  Like waters in commotion!                                 60

  Yon tawny slip is Libya's sands
  That silver thread the river Dnieper;
  And look, where clothed in brightest green
  Is a sweet Isle, of isles the Queen;
  Ye fairies, from all evil keep her!                       65

  And see the town where I was born!
  Around those happy fields we span
  In boyish gambols;--I was lost
  Where I have been, but on this coast
  I feel I am a man.                                        70

  Never did fifty things at once
  Appear so lovely, never, never;--
  How tunefully the forests ring!
  To hear the earth's soft murmuring
  Thus could I hang for ever!                               75

  "Shame on you!" cried my little Boat,
  "Was ever such a homesick [11] Loon,
  Within a living Boat to sit,
  And make no better use of it;
  A Boat twin-sister of the crescent-moon!                  80

  [12]

  "Ne'er in the breast of full-grown Poet
  Fluttered so faint a heart before;--
  Was it the music of the spheres
  That overpowered your mortal ears?
  --Such din shall trouble them no more.                    85

  "These nether precincts do not lack
  Charms of their own;--then come with me;
  I want a comrade, and for you
  There's nothing that I would not do;
  Nought is there that you shall not see.                   90

  "Haste! and above Siberian snows
  We'll sport amid the boreal morning;
  Will mingle with her lustres gliding
  Among the stars, the stars now hiding,
  And now the stars adorning.                               95

  "I know the secrets of a land
  Where human foot did never stray;
  Fair is that land [13] as evening skies,
  And cool, though in the depth it lies
  Of burning Africa.                                       100

  "Or we'll into the realm of Faery,
  Among the lovely shades of things;
  The shadowy forms of mountains bare,
  And streams, and bowers, and ladies fair,
  The shades of palaces and kings!                         105

  "Or, if you thirst with hardy zeal
  Less quiet regions to explore,
  Prompt voyage shall to you reveal
  How earth and heaven are taught to feel
  The might of magic lore!"                                110

  "My little vagrant Form of light,
  My gay and beautiful Canoe,
  Well have you played your friendly part;
  As kindly take what from my heart
  Experience forces--then adieu!                           115

  "Temptation lurks among your words;
  But, while these pleasures you're pursuing
  Without impediment or let,
  No wonder if you quite forget [14]
  What on the earth is doing.                              120

  "There was a time when all mankind
  Did listen with a faith sincere
  To tuneful tongues in mystery versed;
  _Then_ Poets fearlessly rehearsed
  The wonders of a wild career.                            125

  "Go--(but the world's a sleepy world,
  And 'tis, I fear, an age too late)
  Take with you some ambitious Youth!
  For, restless Wanderer! I, in truth, [15]
  Am all unfit to be your mate.                            130

  "Long have I loved what I behold,
  The night that calms, the day that cheers;
  The common growth of mother-earth
  Suffices me--her tears, her mirth,
  Her humblest mirth and tears.                            135

  "The dragon's wing, the magic ring,
  I shall not covet for my dower,
  If I along that lowly way
  With sympathetic heart may stray,
  And with a soul of power.                                140

  "These given, what more need I desire
  To stir, to soothe, or elevate?
  What nobler marvels than the mind
  May in life's daily prospect find,
  May find or there create?                                145

  "A potent wand doth Sorrow wield;
  What spell so strong as guilty Fear!
  Repentance is a tender Sprite;
  If aught on earth have heavenly might,
  'Tis lodged within her silent tear.                      150

  "But grant my wishes,--let us now
  Descend from this ethereal height;
  Then take thy way, adventurous Skiff,
  More daring far than Hippogriff,
  And be thy own delight!                                  155

  "To the stone-table in my garden,
  Loved haunt of many a summer hour, [E]
  The Squire is come: his daughter Bess
  Beside him in the cool recess
  Sits blooming like a flower.                             160

  "With these are many more convened;
  They know not I have been so far;--
  I see them there, in number nine,
  Beneath the spreading Weymouth-pine!
  I see them--there they are!                              165

  "There sits the Vicar and his Dame;
  And there my good friend, Stephen Otter;
  And, ere the light of evening fail,
  To them I must relate the Tale
  Of Peter Bell the Potter."                               170

  Off flew the Boat--away she flees,
  Spurning her freight with indignation! [16]
  "And I, as well as I was able,
  On two poor legs, toward my stone-table
  Limped on with sore vexation.  [17]                      175

  "O, here he is!" cried little Bess--
  She saw me at the garden-door;
  "We've waited anxiously and long,"
  They cried, and all around me throng,
  Full nine of them or more!                               180

  "Reproach me not--your fears be still--
  Be thankful we again have met;--
  Resume, my Friends! within the shade
  Your seats, and quickly [18] shall be paid
  The well-remembered debt."                               185

  I spake with faltering voice, like one
  Not wholly rescued from the pale
  Of a wild dream, or worse illusion;
  But, straight, to cover my confusion,
  Began the promised Tale. [19]                            190



PART FIRST

  All by the moonlight river side
  Groaned the poor Beast--alas! in vain;
  The staff was raised to loftier height,
  And the blows fell with heavier weight
  As Peter struck--and struck again. [20]                  195

  [21]

  "Hold!" cried the Squire, "against the rules
  Of common sense you're surely sinning;
  This leap is for us all too bold; [22]
  Who Peter was, let that be told,
  And start from the beginning."                           200

--"A Potter, [F] Sir, he was by trade,"
  Said I, becoming quite collected;
  "And wheresoever he appeared,
  Full twenty times was Peter feared
  For once that Peter was respected.                       205

  "He two-and-thirty years or more,
  Had been a wild and woodland rover;
  Had heard the Atlantic surges roar
  On farthest Cornwall's rocky shore,
  And trod the cliffs of Dover.                            210

  "And he had seen Caernarvon's towers,
  And well he knew the spire of Sarum;
  And he had been where Lincoln bell
  Flings o'er the fen that ponderous knell--
  A far-renowned alarum. [23]                              215

  "At Doncaster, at York, and Leeds,
  And merry Carlisle had he been;
  And all along the Lowlands fair,
  All through the bonny shire of Ayr;
  And far as Aberdeen.                                     220

  "And he had been at Inverness;
  And Peter, by the mountain-rills,
  Had danced his round with Highland lasses;
  And he had lain beside his asses
  On lofty Cheviot Hills:                                  225

  "And he had trudged through Yorkshire dales,
  Among the rocks and winding _scars_;
  Where deep and low the hamlets lie
  Beneath their little patch of sky
  And little lot of stars:                                 230

  "And all along the indented coast,
  Bespattered with the salt-sea foam;
  Where'er a knot of houses lay
  On headland, or in hollow bay;--
  Sure never man like him did roam!                        235

  "As well might Peter, in the Fleet,
  Have been fast bound, a begging debtor;--
  He travelled here, he travelled there;--
  But not the value of a hair
  Was heart or head the better.                            240

  "He roved among the vales and streams,
  In the green wood and hollow dell;
  They were his dwellings night and day,--
  But nature ne'er could find the way
  Into the heart of Peter Bell.                            245

  "In vain, through every changeful year,
  Did Nature lead him as before;
  A primrose by a river's brim
  A yellow primrose was to him,
  And it was nothing more.                                 250

  "Small change it made in Peter's heart
  To see his gentle panniered train
  With more than vernal pleasure feeding,
  Where'er the tender grass was leading
  Its earliest green along the lane.                       255

  "In vain, through water, earth, and air,
  The soul of happy sound was spread,
  When Peter on some April morn,
  Beneath the broom or budding thorn,
  Made the warm earth his lazy bed.                        260

  "At noon, when, by the forest's edge
  He lay beneath the branches high,
  The soft blue sky did never melt
  Into his heart; he never felt
  The witchery of the soft blue sky!                       265

  "On a fair prospect some have looked
  And felt, as I have heard them say,
  As if the moving time had been
  A thing as steadfast as the scene
  On which they gazed themselves away.                     270

  "Within the breast of Peter Bell
  These silent raptures found no place; [24]
  He was a Carl as wild and rude
  As ever hue-and-cry pursued,
  As ever ran a felon's race.                              275

  "Of all that lead a lawless life,
  Of all that love their lawless lives,
  In city or in village small,
  He was the wildest far of all;--
  He had a dozen wedded wives.                             280

  "Nay, start not!--wedded wives--and twelve!
  But how one wife could e'er come near him,
  In simple truth I cannot tell;
  For, be it said of Peter Bell,
  To see him was to fear him.                              285

  "Though Nature could not touch his heart
  By lovely forms, and silent [25] weather,
  And tender sounds, yet you might see
  At once, that Peter Bell and she
  Had often been together.                                 290

  "A savage wildness round him hung
  As of a dweller out of doors;
  In his whole figure and his mien
  A savage character was seen
  Of mountains and of dreary moors.                        295

  "To all the unshaped half-human thoughts
  Which solitary Nature feeds
  'Mid summer storms or winter's ice,
  Had Peter joined whatever vice
  The cruel city breeds.                                   300

  "His face was keen as is the wind
  That cuts along the hawthorn-fence;
  Of courage you saw little there,
  But, in its stead, a medley air
  Of cunning and of impudence.                             305

  "He had a dark and sidelong walk,
  And long and slouching was his gait;
  Beneath his looks so bare and bold,
  You might perceive, his spirit cold
  Was playing with some inward bait.                       310

  "His forehead wrinkled was and furred;
  A work, one half of which was done
  By thinking of his '_whens_,' and '_hows_';
  And half, by knitting of his brows
  Beneath the glaring sun.                                 315

  "There was a hardness in his cheek,
  There was a hardness in his eye,
  As if the man had fixed his face,
  In many a solitary place,
  Against the wind and open sky!"                          320


         *       *       *       *       *


  One night, (and now my little Bess!
  We've reached at last the promised Tale;)
  One beautiful November night,
  When the full moon was shining bright
  Upon the rapid river Swale,                              325

  Along the river's winding banks
  Peter was travelling all alone;
  Whether to buy or sell, or led
  By pleasure running in his head,
  To me was never known.                                   330

  He trudged along through copse and brake,
  He trudged along o'er hill and dale;
  Nor for the moon cared he a tittle,
  And for the stars he cared as little,
  And for the murmuring river Swale.                       335

  But, chancing to espy a path
  That promised to cut short the way;
  As many a wiser man hath done,
  He left a trusty guide for one
  That might his steps betray.                             340

  To a thick wood he soon is brought
  Where cheerily [26] his course he weaves,
  And whistling loud may yet be heard,
  Though often buried, like a bird
  Darkling, among the boughs and leaves.                   345

  But quickly Peter's mood is changed,
  And on he drives with cheeks that burn
  In downright fury and in wrath;--
  There's little sign the treacherous path
  Will to the road return!                                 350

  The path grows dim, and dimmer still;
  Now up, now down, the Rover wends,
  With all the sail that he can carry,
  Till brought to a deserted quarry--[27]
  And there the pathway ends.                              355

  [28]

  He paused--for shadows of strange shape,
  Massy and black, before him lay;
  But through the dark, and through the cold, [29]
  And through the yawning fissures old,
  Did Peter boldly press his way                           360

  Right through the quarry;--and behold
  A scene of soft and lovely hue!
  Where blue and grey, and tender green,
  Together make [30] as sweet a scene
  As ever human eye did view.                              365

  Beneath the clear blue sky he saw
  A little field of meadow ground;
  But field or meadow name it not;
  Call it of earth a small green plot,
  With rocks encompassed round.                            370

  The Swale flowed under the grey rocks,
  But he flowed quiet and unseen;--
  You need a strong and stormy gale
  To bring the noises of the Swale
  To that green spot, so calm and green!                   375

  [31]

  And is there no one dwelling here,
  No hermit with his beads and glass?
  And does no little cottage look
  Upon this soft and fertile nook?
  Does no one live near this green grass?                  380

  Across the [32] deep and quiet spot
  Is Peter driving through the grass--
  And now has reached the skirting trees; [33]
  When, turning round his head, he sees
  A solitary Ass.                                          385

  [34]

  "A prize!" cries Peter--but he first
  Must spy about him far and near: [35]
  There's not a single house in sight,
  No woodman's hut, no cottage light--
  Peter, you need not fear!                                390

  There's nothing to be seen but woods,
  And rocks that spread a hoary gleam,
  And this one Beast, that from the bed
  Of the green meadow hangs his head
  Over the silent stream.                                  395

  His head is with a halter bound;
  The halter seizing, Peter leapt
  Upon the Creature's back, [36] and plied
  With ready heels his shaggy side; [37]
  But still the Ass his station kept.                      400

  [38]

  Then Peter gave a sudden jerk,
  A jerk that from a dungeon-floor
  Would have pulled up an iron ring;
  But still the heavy-headed Thing
  Stood just as he had stood before!                       405

  Quoth Peter, leaping from his seat,
  "There is some plot against me laid";
  Once more the little meadow-ground
  And all the hoary cliffs around
  He cautiously surveyed.                                  410

  All, all is silent--rocks and woods,
  All still and silent--far and near!
  Only the Ass, with motion dull,
  Upon the pivot of his skull
  Turns round his long left ear.                           415

  Thought Peter, What can mean all this?
  Some ugly witchcraft must be here!
--Once more the Ass, with motion dull,
  Upon the pivot of his skull
  Turned round his long left ear.                          420

  Suspicion ripened into dread;
  Yet with deliberate action slow,
  His staff high-raising, in the pride
  Of skill, upon the sounding hide, [39]
  He dealt a sturdy blow.                                  425

  The poor Ass staggered with the shock;
  And then, as if to take his ease, [40]
  In quiet uncomplaining mood,
  Upon the spot where he had stood,
  Dropped gently down upon his knees;                      430

  As gently on [41] his side he fell;
  And by the river's brink did lie;
  And, while [42] he lay like one that mourned,
  The patient Beast on Peter turned
  His shining hazel eye. [43]                              435

  'Twas but one mild, reproachful look,
  A look more tender than severe;
  And straight in sorrow, not in dread,
  He turned the eye-ball in his head
  Towards the smooth river [44] deep and clear.            440

  Upon the Beast the sapling rings;
  His lank sides heaved, [45] his limbs they stirred;
  He gave a groan, and then another,
  Of that which went before the brother,
  And then he gave a third.                                445

  All by the moonlight river side
  He gave three miserable groans;
  And not till now hath Peter seen
  How gaunt the Creature is,--how lean
  And sharp his staring bones! [46]                         450

  With legs stretched out and stiff he lay:--
  No word of kind commiseration
  Fell at the sight from Peter's tongue;
  With hard contempt his heart was wrung,
  With hatred and vexation.                                455

  The meagre beast lay still as death;
  And Peter's lips with fury quiver;
  Quoth he, "You little mulish dog,
  I'll fling your carcass like a log
  Head-foremost down the river!"                           460

  An impious oath confirmed the threat--
  Whereat from the earth on which he lay [47]
  To all the echoes, south and north,
  And east and west, the Ass sent forth
  A long and clamorous bray! [48]                          465

  This outcry, on the heart of Peter,
  Seems like a note of joy to strike,--
  Joy at [49] the heart of Peter knocks;
  But in the echo of the rocks
  Was something Peter did not like.                        470

  Whether to cheer his coward breast,
  Or that he could not break the chain,
  In this serene and solemn hour,
  Twined round him by demoniac power,
  To the blind work he turned again.                       475

  Among the rocks and winding crags;
  Among the mountains far away;
  Once more the Ass did lengthen out
  More ruefully a deep-drawn shout,
  The hard dry see-saw of his horrible bray! [50]          480

  What is there now in Peter's heart!
  Or whence the might of this strange sound?
  The moon uneasy looked and dimmer,
  The broad blue heavens appeared to glimmer,
  And the rocks staggered all around--485

  From Peter's hand the sapling dropped!
  Threat has he none to execute;
  "If any one should come and see
  That I am here, they'll think," quoth he,
  "I'm helping this poor dying brute."                     490

  He scans the Ass from limb to limb,
  And ventures now to uplift his eyes;
  More steady looks the moon, and clear,
  More like themselves the rocks appear
  And touch more quiet skies. [51]                         495

  His scorn returns--his hate revives;
  He stoops the Ass's neck to seize
  With malice--that again takes flight;
  For in the pool a startling sight
  Meets him, among the inverted trees. [52]                500

  Is it the moon's distorted face?
  The ghost-like image of a cloud?
  Is it a gallows [53] there portrayed?
  Is Peter of himself afraid?
  Is it a coffin,--or a shroud?                            505

  A grisly idol hewn in stone?
  Or imp from witch's lap let fall?
  Perhaps a ring of shining fairies?
  Such as pursue their feared vagaries [54]
  In sylvan bower, or haunted hall?                        510

  Is it a fiend that to a stake
  Of fire his desperate self is tethering?
  Or stubborn spirit doomed to yell
  In solitary ward or cell,
  Ten thousand miles from all his brethren?                515

  [55]

  Never did pulse so quickly throb,
  And never heart so loudly panted; [56]
  He looks, he cannot choose but look;
  Like some one reading in a book--[57]
  A book that is enchanted.                                520

  Ah, well-a-day for Peter Bell!
  He will be turned to iron soon,
  Meet Statue for the court of Fear!
  His hat is up--and every hair
  Bristles, and whitens in the moon!                       525

  He looks, he ponders, looks again;
  He sees a motion--hears a groan;
  His eyes will burst--his heart will break--
  He gives a loud and frightful shriek,
  And back he falls, [58] as if his life were flown!       530


PART SECOND

  We left our Hero in a trance,
  Beneath the alders, near the river;
  The Ass is by the river-side,
  And, where the feeble breezes glide,
  Upon the stream the moonbeams quiver.                    535

  A happy respite! but at length
  He feels the glimmering of the moon;
  Wakes with glazed eye, and feebly sighing--
  To sink, perhaps, where he is lying,
  Into a second swoon! [59]                                540

  He lifts his head, he sees his staff;
  He touches--'tis to him a treasure!
  Faint recollection seems to tell
  That he is yet where mortals dwell--
  A thought received with languid pleasure!                545

  His head upon his elbow propped,
  Becoming less and less perplexed,
  Sky-ward he looks--to rock and wood--
  And then--upon the glassy [60] flood
  His wandering eye is fixed.                              550

  Thought he, that is the face of one
  In his last sleep securely bound!
  So toward the stream his head he bent,
  And downward thrust his staff, intent
  The river's depth to sound. [61]                         555

  _Now_--like a tempest-shattered bark,
  That overwhelmed and prostrate lies,
  And in a moment to the verge
  Is lifted of a foaming surge--
  Full suddenly the Ass doth rise!                         560

  His staring bones all shake with joy,
  And close by Peter's side he stands:
  While Peter o'er the river bends,
  The little Ass his neck extends,
  And fondly licks his hands.                              565

  Such life is in the Ass's eyes,
  Such life is in his limbs and ears;
  That Peter Bell, if he had been
  The veriest coward ever seen,
  Must now have thrown aside his fears.                    570

  The Ass looks on--and to his work
  Is Peter quietly resigned;
  He touches here--he touches there--
  And now among the dead man's hair
  His sapling Peter has entwined.                          575

  He pulls--and looks--and pulls again;
  And he whom the poor Ass had lost,
  The man who had been four days dead,
  Head-foremost from the river's bed
  Uprises like a ghost! [G]                                580

  And Peter draws him to dry land;
  And through the brain of Peter pass
  Some poignant twitches, fast and faster;
  "No doubt," quoth he, "he is the Master
  Of this poor miserable Ass!"                             585

  The meagre shadow that looks on--
  What would he now? [62] what is he doing?
  His sudden fit of joy is flown,--
  He on his knees hath laid him down,
  As if he were his grief renewing;                        590

  But no--that Peter on his back
  Must mount, he shows well as he can: [63]
  Thought Peter then, come weal or woe
  I'll do what he would have me do,
  In pity to this poor drowned man.                        595

  With that resolve he boldly mounts [64]
  Upon the pleased and thankful Ass;
  And then, without a moment's stay,
  That [65] earnest Creature turned away,
  Leaving the body on the grass.                           600

  Intent upon his faithful watch,
  The Beast four days and nights had past;
  A sweeter meadow ne'er was seen,
  And there the Ass four days had been,
  Nor ever once did break his fast:                        605

  Yet firm his step, and stout his heart;
  The mead is crossed--the quarry's mouth
  Is reached; but there the trusty guide
  Into a thicket turns aside,
  And deftly ambles [66] towards the south.                610

  When hark a burst of doleful sound!
  And Peter honestly might say,
  The like came never to his ears,
  Though he has been, full thirty years,
  A rover--night and day!                                  615

  'Tis not a plover of the moors,
  'Tis not a bittern of the fen;
  Nor can it be a barking fox,
  Nor night-bird chambered in the rocks,
  Nor wild-cat in a woody glen!                            620

  The Ass is startled--and stops short
  Right in the middle of the thicket;
  And Peter, wont to whistle loud
  Whether alone or in a crowd,
  Is silent as a silent cricket.                           625

  What ails you now, my little Bess?
  Well may you tremble and look grave!
  This cry--that rings along the wood,
  This cry--that floats adown the flood,
  Comes from the entrance of a cave:                       630

  I see a blooming Wood-boy there,
  And if I had the power to say
  How sorrowful the wanderer is,
  Your heart would be as sad as his
  Till you had kissed his tears away!                      635

  Grasping [67] a hawthorn branch in hand,
  All bright with berries ripe and red,
  Into the cavern's mouth he peeps;
  Thence back into the moonlight creeps;
  Whom seeks he--whom?--the silent dead: [68]              640

  His father!--Him doth he require--
  Him hath he sought [69] with fruitless pains,
  Among the rocks, behind the trees;
  Now creeping on his hands and knees,
  Now running o'er the open plains.                        645

  And hither is he come at last,
  When he through such a day has gone,
  By this dark cave to be distrest
  Like a poor bird--her plundered nest
  Hovering around with dolorous moan!                      650

  Of that intense and piercing cry
  The listening Ass conjectures well; [70]
  Wild as it is, he there can read
  Some intermingled notes that plead
  With touches irresistible.                               655

  But Peter--when he saw the Ass
  Not only stop but turn, and change
  The cherished tenor of his pace
  That lamentable cry [71] to chase--
  It wrought in him conviction strange;                    660

  A faith that, for the dead man's sake
  And this poor slave who loved him well,
  Vengeance upon his head will fall,
  Some visitation worse than all
  Which ever till this night befel.                        665

  Meanwhile the Ass to reach his home, [72]
  Is striving stoutly as he may;
  But, while he climbs the woody hill,
  The cry grows weak--and weaker still;
  And now at last it dies away.                            670

  So with his freight the Creature turns
  Into a gloomy grove of beech,
  Along the shade with footsteps [73] true
  Descending slowly, till the two
  The open moonlight reach.                                675

  And there, along the [74] narrow dell,
  A fair smooth pathway you discern,
  A length of green and open road--
  As if it from a fountain flowed--
  Winding away between the fern.                           680

  The rocks that tower on either side
  Build up a wild fantastic scene;
  Temples like those among the Hindoos,
  And mosques, and spires, and abbey-windows,
  And castles all with ivy green!                          685

  And, while the Ass pursues his way,
  Along this solitary dell,
  As pensively his steps advance,
  The mosques and spires change countenance,
  And look at Peter Bell!                                  690

  That unintelligible cry
  Hath left him high in preparation,--
  Convinced that he, or soon or late,
  This very night will meet his fate--
  And so he sits in expectation!                           695

  [75]

  The strenuous Animal hath clomb
  With the green path; and now he wends
  Where, shining like the smoothest sea,
  In undisturbed immensity
  A [76] level plain extends.                              700

  But whence this faintly-rustling sound
  By which the journeying pair are chased?
--A withered leaf is close behind, [77]
  Light plaything for the sportive wind
  Upon that solitary waste.                                705

  When Peter spied the moving thing,
  It only doubled his distress; [78]
  "Where there is not a bush or tree,
  The very leaves they follow me--
  So huge hath been my wickedness!"                        710

  To a close lane they now are come,
  Where, as before, the enduring Ass
  Moves on without a moment's stop,
  Nor once turns round his head to crop
  A bramble-leaf or blade of grass.                        715

  Between the hedges as they go,
  The white dust sleeps upon the lane;
  And Peter, ever and anon
  Back-looking, sees, upon a stone,
  Or in the dust, a crimson stain.                         720

  A stain--as of a drop of blood
  By moonlight made more faint and wan;
  Ha! why these sinkings of despair? [79]
  He knows not how the blood comes there--
  And Peter is a wicked man.                               725

  At length he spies a bleeding wound,
  Where he had struck the Ass's head; [80]
  He sees the blood, knows what it is,--
  A glimpse of sudden joy was his,
  But then it quickly fled;                                730

  Of him whom sudden death had seized
  He thought,--of thee, O faithful Ass!
  And once again those ghastly pains,
  Shoot to and fro through heart and reins,
  And through his brain like lightning pass. [81]          735


PART THIRD

  I've heard of one, a gentle Soul,
  Though given to sadness and to gloom,
  And for the fact will vouch,--one night
  It chanced that by a taper's light
  This man was reading in his room;                        740

  Bending, as you or I might bend
  At night o'er any pious book, [82]
  When sudden blackness overspread
  The snow white page on which he read,
  And made the good man round him look.                    745

  The chamber walls were dark all round,--
  And to his book he turned again;
--The light had left the lonely taper, [83]
  And formed itself upon the paper
  Into large letters--bright and plain!                    750

  The godly book was in his hand--
  And, on the page, more black than coal,
  Appeared, set forth in strange array,
  A _word_--which to his dying day
  Perplexed the good man's gentle soul.                    755

  The ghostly word, thus plainly seen, [84]
  Did never from his lips depart;
  But he hath said, poor gentle wight!
  It brought full many a sin to light
  Out of the bottom of his heart.                          760

  Dread Spirits! to confound the meek [85]
  Why wander from your course so far,
  Disordering colour, form, and stature!
--Let good men feel the soul of nature,
  And see things as they are.                              765

  Yet, potent Spirits! well I know,
  How ye, that play with soul and sense,
  Are not unused to trouble friends
  Of goodness, for most gracious ends--[86]
  And this I speak in reverence!                           770

  But might I give advice to you,
  Whom in my fear I love so well;
  From men of pensive virtue go,
  Dread Beings! and your empire show
  On hearts like that of Peter Bell.                       775

  Your presence often have I [87] felt
  In darkness and the stormy night;
  And, with like force, [88] if need there be,
  Ye can put forth your agency
  When earth is calm, and heaven is bright.                780

  Then, coming from the wayward world,
  That powerful world in which ye dwell,
  Come, Spirits of the Mind! and try,
  To-night, beneath the moonlight sky,
  What may be done with Peter Bell!                        785

--O, would that some more skilful voice
  My further labour might prevent!
  Kind Listeners, that around me sit,
  I feel that I am all unfit
  For such high argument.                                  790

  I've played, I've danced, [89] with my narration;
  I loitered long ere I began:
  Ye waited then on my good pleasure;
  Pour out indulgence still, in measure
  As liberal as ye can!                                    795

  Our Travellers, ye remember well,
  Are thridding a sequestered lane;
  And Peter many tricks is trying,
  And many anodynes applying,
  To ease his conscience of its pain.                      800

  By this his heart is lighter far;
  And, finding that he can account
  So snugly [90] for that crimson stain,
  His evil spirit up again
  Does like an empty bucket mount.                         805

  And Peter is a deep logician
  Who hath no lack of wit mercurial;
  "Blood drops--leaves rustle--yet," quoth he,
  "This poor man never, but for me,
  Could have had Christian burial.                         810

  "And, say the best you can, 'tis plain,
  That here has [91] been some wicked dealing;
  No doubt the devil in me wrought;
  I'm not the man who could have thought
  An Ass like this was worth the stealing!"                815

  So from his pocket Peter takes
  His shining horn tobacco-box;
  And, in a light and careless way,
  As men who with their purpose play,
  Upon the lid he knocks.                                  820

  Let them whose voice can stop the clouds,
  Whose cunning eye can see the wind,
  Tell to a curious world the cause
  Why, making here a sudden pause,
  The Ass turned round his head, and _grinned_.            825

  Appalling process! I have marked
  The like on heath, in lonely wood;
  And, verily, have seldom met
  A spectacle more hideous--yet
  It suited Peter's present mood.                          830

  And, grinning in his turn, his teeth
  He in jocose defiance showed--
  When, to upset [92] his spiteful mirth,
  A murmur, pent within the earth,
  In the dead earth beneath the road,                      835

  Rolled audibly! it swept along,
  A muffled noise--a rumbling sound!--
  'Twas by a troop of miners made,
  Plying with gunpowder their trade,
  Some twenty fathoms underground.                         840

  Small cause of dire effect! for, surely,
  If ever mortal, King or Cotter,
  Believed that earth was charged to quake
  And yawn for his unworthy sake,
  'Twas Peter Bell the Potter.                             845

  But, as an oak in breathless air
  Will stand though to the centre hewn;
  Or as the weakest things, if frost
  Have stiffened them, maintain their post;
  So he, beneath the gazing moon!--850

  The Beast bestriding thus, he reached
  A spot where, in a sheltering cove, [93]
  A little chapel stands alone,
  With greenest ivy overgrown,
  And tufted with an ivy grove;                            855

  Dying insensibly away
  From human thoughts and purposes,
  It seemed--wall, window, roof and tower [94]--
  To bow to some transforming power,
  And blend with the surrounding trees.                    860

  As ruinous a place it was,
  Thought Peter, in the shire of Fife
  That served my turn, when following still
  From land to land a reckless will [95]
  I married my sixth wife!                                 865

  The unheeding Ass moves slowly on,
  And now is passing by an inn
  Brim-full of a carousing crew,
  That make, [96] with curses not a few,
  An uproar and a drunken din.                             870

  I cannot well express the thoughts
  Which Peter in those noises found;--
  A stifling power compressed his frame,
  While-as a swimming darkness came [97]
  Over that dull and dreary sound.                         875

  For well did Peter know the sound;
  The language of those drunken joys
  To him, a jovial soul, I ween,
  But a few hours ago, had been
  A gladsome and a welcome noise.                          880

  _Now_, [98] turned adrift into the past,
  He finds no solace in his course;
  Like planet-stricken men of yore,
  He trembles, smitten to the core
  By strong compunction and remorse.                       885

  But, more than all, his heart is stung
  To think of one, almost a child;
  A sweet and playful Highland girl,
  As light and beauteous as a squirrel,
  As beauteous and as wild!                                890

  Her dwelling was a lonely house, [99]
  A cottage in a heathy dell;
  And she put on her gown of green,
  And left her mother at sixteen,
  And followed Peter Bell.                                 895

  But many good and pious thoughts
  Had she; and, in the kirk to pray,
  Two long Scotch miles, through rain or snow,
  To kirk she had been used to go,
  Twice every Sabbath-day.                                 900

  And, when she followed Peter Bell,
  It was to lead an honest life;
  For he, with tongue not used to falter,
  Had pledged his troth before the altar
  To love her as his wedded wife.                          905

  A mother's hope is hers;--but soon
  She drooped and pined like one forlorn;
  From Scripture she a name [100] did borrow;
  Benoni, or the child of sorrow,
  She called her babe unborn.                              910

  For she had learned how Peter lived,
  And took it in most grievous part;
  She to the very bone was worn,
  And, ere that little child was born,
  Died of a broken heart.                                  915

  And now the Spirits of the Mind
  Are busy with poor Peter Bell;
  Upon the rights of visual sense
  Usurping, with a prevalence
  More terrible than magic spell. [101]                    920

  Close by a brake of flowering furze
  (Above it shivering aspens play)
  He sees an unsubstantial creature,
  His very self in form and feature,
  Not four yards from the broad highway:                   925

  And stretched beneath the furze he sees
  The Highland girl--it is no other;
  And hears her crying as she cried,
  The very moment that she died,
  "My mother! oh my mother!"                               930

  The sweat pours down from Peter's face,
  So grievous is his heart's contrition;
  With agony his eye-balls ache
  While he beholds by the furze-brake
  This miserable vision!                                   935

  Calm is the well-deserving brute,
  _His_ peace hath no offence betrayed;
  But now, while down that slope he wends,
  A voice to Peter's ear [102] ascends,
  Resounding from the woody glade:                         940

  The voice, though clamorous as a horn
  Re-echoed by a naked rock,
  Comes from that tabernacle--List! [103]
  Within, a fervent [104] Methodist
  Is preaching to no heedless flock!                       945

  "Repent! repent!" he cries aloud,
  "While yet ye may find mercy;--strive
  To love the Lord with all your might;
  Turn to him, seek him day and night,
  And save your souls alive!                               950

  "Repent! repent! though ye have gone,
  Through paths of wickedness and woe,
  After the Babylonian harlot;
  And, though your sins be red as scarlet,
  They shall be white as snow!"                            955

  Even as he passed the door, these words
  Did plainly come to Peter's ears;
  And they such joyful tidings were,
  The joy was more than he could bear!--
  He melted into tears.                                    960

  Sweet tears of hope and tenderness!
  And fast they fell, a plenteous shower!
  His nerves, his sinews seemed to melt;
  Through all his iron frame was felt
  A gentle, a relaxing, power!                             965

  Each fibre of his frame was weak;
  Weak all the animal within;
  But, in its helplessness, grew mild
  And gentle as an infant child,
  An infant that has known no sin.                         970

  'Tis said, meek Beast! that, through Heaven's grace,[105] [H]
  He not unmoved did notice now
  The cross [I] upon thy shoulder scored,
  For lasting impress, by the Lord [106]
  To whom all human-kind shall bow;                        975

  Memorial of his touch--that day [107]
  When Jesus humbly deigned to ride,
  Entering the proud Jerusalem,
  By an immeasurable stream [J]
  Of shouting people deified!                              980

  Meanwhile the persevering Ass,
  Turned towards a gate that hung in view
  Across a shady lane; [108] his chest
  Against the yielding gate he pressed
  And quietly passed through.                              985

  And up the stony lane he goes;
  No ghost more softly ever trod;
  Among the stones and pebbles, he
  Sets down his hoofs inaudibly,
  As if with felt his hoofs were shod.                     990

  Along the lane the trusty Ass
  Went twice two hundred yards or more,
  And no one could have guessed his aim,--
  Till to a lonely house he came,
  And stopped beside the door. [109]                       995

  Thought Peter, 'tis the poor man's home!
  He listens--not a sound is heard
  Save from the trickling household rill;
  But, stepping o'er the cottage-sill,
  Forthwith a little Girl appeared.                       1000

  She to the Meeting-house was bound
  In hopes [110] some tidings there to gather:
  No glimpse it is, no doubtful gleam;
  She saw--and uttered with a scream,
  "My father! here's my father!"                          1005

  The very word was plainly heard,
  Heard plainly by the wretched Mother--
  Her joy was like a deep affright:
  And forth she rushed into the light,
  And saw it was another!                                 1010

  And, instantly, upon the earth,
  Beneath the full moon shining bright,
  Close to [111] the Ass's feet she fell;
  At the same moment Peter Bell
  Dismounts in most unhappy plight.                       1015

  As he beheld the Woman lie [112]
  Breathless and motionless, the mind
  Of Peter sadly was confused;
  But, though to such demands unused,
  And helpless almost as the blind,                       1020

  He raised her up; and, while he held
  Her body propped against his knee,
  The Woman waked--and when she spied
  The poor Ass standing by her side,
  She moaned most bitterly.                               1025

  "Oh! God be praised--my heart's at ease--
  For he is dead--I know it well!"
--At this she wept a bitter flood;
  And, in the best way that he could,
  His tale did Peter tell.                                1030

  He trembles--he is pale as death;
  His voice is weak with perturbation;
  He turns aside his head, he pauses;
  Poor Peter from a thousand causes,
  Is crippled sore in his narration.                      1035

  At length she learned how he espied
  The Ass in that small meadow-ground;
  And that her Husband now lay dead,
  Beside that luckless river's bed
  In which he had been drowned.                           1040

  A piercing look the Widow [113] cast
  Upon the Beast that near her stands;
  She sees 'tis he, that 'tis the same;
  She calls the poor Ass by his name,
  And wrings, and wrings her hands.                       1045

  "O wretched loss--untimely stroke!
  If he had died upon his bed!
  He knew not one forewarning pain;
  He never will come home again--
  Is dead, for ever dead!"                                1050

  Beside the Woman Peter stands;
  His heart is opening more and more;
  A holy sense pervades his mind;
  He feels what he for human-kind
  Had never felt before.                                  1055

  At length, by Peter's arm sustained,
  The Woman rises from the ground--
  "Oh, mercy! something must be done,
  My little Rachel, you must run,--
  Some willing neighbour must be found.                   1060

  "Make haste--my little Rachel--do,
  The first you meet with--bid him come,
  Ask him to lend his horse to-night,
  And this good Man, whom Heaven requite,
  Will help to bring the body home."                      1065

  Away goes Rachel weeping loud;--
  An Infant, waked by her distress,
  Makes in the house a piteous cry;
  And Peter hears the Mother sigh,
  "Seven are they, and all fatherless!"                   1070

  And now is Peter taught to feel
  That man's heart is a holy thing;
  And Nature, through a world of death,
  Breathes into him a second breath,
  More searching than the breath of spring.               1075

  Upon a stone the Woman sits
  In agony of silent grief--
  From his own thoughts did Peter start;
  He longs to press her to his heart,
  From love that cannot find relief.                      1080

  But roused, as if through every limb
  Had past a sudden shock of dread,
  The Mother o'er the threshold flies,
  And up the cottage stairs [114] she hies,
  And on the pillow lays [115] her burning head.          1085

  And Peter turns his steps aside
  Into a shade of darksome trees,
  Where he sits down, he knows not how,
  With his hands pressed against his brow,
  His elbows on [116] his tremulous knees.                1090

  There, self-involved, does Peter sit
  Until no sign of life he makes,
  As if his mind were sinking deep
  Through years that have been long asleep!
  The trance is passed away--he wakes;                    1095

  He lifts [117] his head--and sees the Ass
  Yet standing in the clear moonshine;
  "When shall I be as good as thou?
  Oh! would, poor beast, that I had now
  A heart but half as good as thine!"                     1100

  But _He_--who deviously hath sought
  His Father through the lonesome woods,
  Hath sought, proclaiming to the ear
  Of night his grief and sorrowful fear--[118]
  He comes, escaped from fields and floods;--1105

  With weary pace is drawing nigh;
  He sees the Ass--and nothing living
  Had ever such a fit of joy
  As hath [119] this little orphan Boy,
  For he has no misgiving!                                1110

  Forth to [120] the gentle Ass he springs,
  And up about his neck he climbs;
  In loving words he talks to him,
  He kisses, kisses face and limb,--
  He kisses him a thousand times!                         1115

  This Peter sees, while in the shade
  He stood beside the cottage-door;
  And Peter Bell, the ruffian wild,
  Sobs loud, he sobs even like a child,
  "Oh! God, I can endure no more!"                        1120

--Here ends my Tale: for in a trice
  Arrived a neighbour with his horse;
  Peter went forth with him straightway;
  And, with due care, ere break of day,
  Together they brought back the Corse.                   1125

  And many years did this poor Ass,
  Whom once it was my luck to see
  Cropping the shrubs of Leming-Lane,
  Help by his labour to maintain
  The Widow and her family.                               1130

  And Peter Bell, who, till that night,
  Had been the wildest of his clan,
  Forsook his crimes, renounced [121] his folly,
  And, after ten months' melancholy,
  Became a good and honest man. [K]                       1135



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1: 1827.

  And something               1819.]



[Variant 2:

1849.

  Whose shape is like         1819.

  For shape just like         1845.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  The noise of danger fills     1819.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  Meanwhile I from the helm admire      1819.

              ... I soberly admire       C.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  Or deep into the heavens     1819.
  Or into massy clouds         1820.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

  ... between ...         1819.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

  ... are ill-built,
  But proud let him be who has seen them;      1819.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

  ... between ...      1819.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

  That darling speck ...      1819.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  And there it is, ...      1819.]


[Variant 11:

1827

  ... heartless ... 1819.]


[Variant 12:

In the editions of 1819 and 1820 only.

  Out--out--and, like a brooding hen,
  Beside your sooty hearth-stone cower;
  Go, creep along the dirt, and pick
  Your way with your good walking-stick,
  Just three good miles an hour!]


[Variant 13:

1827.

  ... the land ...      1819.]


[Variant 14:

1845.

  My radiant Pinnace, you forget       1819.]


[Variant 15:

1827.

  For I myself, in very truth,       1819.]


[Variant 16:

1845.

  Off flew my sparkling Boat in scorn,
  Yea in a trance of indignation!           1819.

  Spurning her freight with indignation!    1820.]


[Variant 17:

1845.

  ... to my stone-table
  Limp'd on with some vexation.    1819.

  ... tow'rd my stone-table        1827.]


[Variant 18:

1827.

  ... promptly ...    1819.]


[Variant 19:

1827.

  Breath fail'd me as I spake--but soon
  With lips, no doubt, and visage pale,
  And sore too from a slight contusion,
  Did I, to cover my confusion,
  Begin the _promised_ Tale.               1819.]


[Variant 20:

1820.

  All by the moonlight river side
  It gave three miserable groans;
  "'Tis come then to a pretty pass,"
  Said Peter to the groaning Ass,
  "But I will _bang_ your bones!"    1819.]


[Variant 21:

In the two editions of 1819 only.

  "Good Sir!"--the Vicar's voice exclaim'd,
  "You rush at once into the middle;"
  And little Bess, with accent sweeter,
  Cried, "O dear Sir! but who is Peter?"
  Said Stephen,--"'Tis a downright riddle!"]


[Variant 22:

1836.

  The Squire said, "Sure as paradise
  Was lost to man by Adam's sinning,
  This leap is for us all too bold;              1819.

  Like winds that lash the waves, or smite
  The woods, the autumnal foliage thinning--
  "Hold!" said the Squire, "I pray you, hold!    1820.

  The woods, autumnal foliage thinning--1827.]


[Variant 23:

1845.

  ... its ponderous knell,
  Its far-renowned alarum!    1819.

  ... his ponderous knell,
  A far-renowned alarum!    1836.

  ... that ponderous knell--
  His far-renowned alarum!    1840.]


[Variant 24:

1820.

  With Peter Bell, I need not tell
  That this had never been the case;--1819.]


[Variant 25:

1819.

  ... placid ...    1820.

The text of 1827 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 26:

1836.
  ... cheerfully ...    1819.]


[Variant 27:

1827.

  Till he is brought to an old quarry,    1819.]


[Variant 28: In the two editions of 1819 only.

  "What! would'st thou daunt me grisly den?
  Back must I, having come so far?
  Stretch as thou wilt thy gloomy jaws,
  I'll on, nor would I give two straws
  For lantern or for star!"]


[Variant 29:

1820.

  And so, where on the huge rough stones
  The black and massy shadows lay,
  And through the dark, ...    1819.]


[Variant 30:

1827.

  ... made ...    1819.]


[Variant 31: In the two editions of 1819 only.

  Now you'll suppose that Peter Bell
  Felt small temptation here to tarry,
  And so it was,--but I must add,
  His heart was not a little glad
  When he was out of the old quarry.]


[Variant 32:

1827.

  Across that ...    1819.]


[Variant 33:

1836.

  And now he is among the trees;    1819.]


[Variant 34:

  "No doubt I'm founder'd in these woods--
  For once," quoth he, "I will be wise,
  With better speed I'll back again--
  And, lest the journey should prove vain,
  Will take yon Ass, my lawful prize!"

  Off Peter hied,--"A comely beast!
  Though not so plump as he might be;
  My honest friend, with such a platter,
  You should have been a little fatter,
  But come, Sir, come with me!"    1819.

(The first of these stanzas was omitted in 1827 and afterwards;
the second was withdrawn in 1820.)]


[Variant 35:

1836.

  But first doth Peter deem it fit
  To spy about him far and near;    1819.

  "A prize," cried Peter, stepping back
  To spy ...    1827.]


[Variant 36:

1827.

  ... Ass's back, ...    1819.]


[Variant 37:

1836.

  With ready heel the creature's side;    1819.

  With ready heel his shaggy side;    1827.]


[Variant 38: In the editions of 1819 to 1832 only.

  "What's this!" cried Peter, brandishing
  A new-peel'd sapling white as cream;
  The Ass knew well what Peter said,
  But, as before, hung down his head
  Over the silent stream.    1819.

  A new-peeled sapling;--though, I deem,
  The Ass knew well what Peter said,
  He, as before, ...    1820.

    ...--though I deem,
  This threat was understood full well,
  Firm, as before, the Sentinel
  Stood by the silent stream.    1827.]


[Variant 39:

1827.

  "I'll cure you of these desperate tricks"--
  And, with deliberate action slow,
  His staff high-raising, in the pride
  Of skill, upon the Ass's hide    C. and 1819.]


[Variant 40:

1836.

What followed?--yielding to the shock
The Ass, as if ...    1819.]


[Variant 41:

1836.

  And then upon ...    1819.]


[Variant 42:

1840.

  ... as ...    1819.]


[Variant 43:

1819.

  The Beast on his tormentor turned
  A shining hazel eye.    1827.

  His shining ...    1832.

The edition of 1836 returns to the text of 1819.]


[Variant 44:

1836.

  Towards the river ...    1819.]


[Variant 45:

1832.

  Heav'd his lank sides, ...    1819.]


[Variant 46: 1836. In the two editions of 1819 this stanza formed two
stanzas, thus:

  All by the moonlight river side
  He gave three miserable groans,
  "'Tis come then to a pretty pass,"
  Said Peter to the groaning ass,
  "But I will _bang_ your bones!"

  And Peter halts to gather breath,
  And now full clearly was it shown
  (What he before in part had seen)
  How gaunt was the poor Ass and lean,
  Yea wasted to a skeleton!    1819.

In the editions of 1820-1832, only the second of these stanzas is
retained, with the following change of text in 1827:

  And, while he halts, was clearly shown
  (What he before in part had seen)
  How gaunt the Creature was, and lean,    1827.

In the final text of 1836 the two stanzas of 1819 are compressed into
one (ll. 446-50).]


[Variant 47:

1836.

  But, while upon the ground he lay,    1819.

  That instant, while outstretched he lay,    1827.]


[Variant 48:

1836.

  A loud and piteous bray!    1819.]


[Variant 49:

1820.

  Joy on ...    1819.]


[Variant 50:

1836.

  ... an endless shout,
  The long dry see-saw ...    1819.]


[Variant 51:

1836.

  And Peter now uplifts his eyes;
  Steady the moon doth look and clear,
  And like themselves the rocks appear,
  And tranquil are the skies,     1819.

  And quiet are the skies.    1820.]


[Variant 52:

1836.

  Whereat, in resolute mood, once more
  He stoops the Ass's neck to seize--
  Foul purpose, quickly put to flight!
  For in the pool a startling sight
  Meets him, beneath the shadowy trees.    1819.]


[Variant 53:

1819.

  ... the gallows ...    1832.

The text of 1836 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 54:

1836.

  Or a gay ring of shining fairies,
  Such as pursue their brisk vagaries    1819.]


[Variant 55: In the two editions of 1819 only.

  Is it a party in a parlour?
  Cramm'd just as they on earth were cramm'd--
  Some sipping punch, some sipping tea,
  But, as you by their faces see,
  All silent and all damn'd! [a]]


[Variant 56:

1827.

  A throbbing pulse the Gazer hath--
  Puzzled he was, and now is daunted;    1819.]


[Variant 57:

1836.

  Like one intent upon a book--1819.]


[Variant 58:

1836.

  And drops, a senseless weight, ...    1819.]


[Variant 59:

1827.

  A happy respite!--but he wakes;--
  And feels the glimmering of the moon--
  And to stretch forth his hands is trying;--
  Sure, when he knows where he is lying,
  He'll sink into a second swoon.    1819.]


[Variant 60:

1827.

  ... placid ...    1819.]


[Variant 61:

1827.

  So, faltering not in _this_ intent,
  He makes his staff an instrument
  The river's depth to sound--1819.

  So toward the stream his head he bent,
  And downward thrust his staff, intent
  To reach the Man who there lay drowned.--1820.]


[Variant 62:

1836.

  The meagre Shadow all this while--
  What aim is his? ...    1819.]


[Variant 63:

1836.

  That Peter on his back should mount
  He shows a wish, well as he can,
  "I'll go, I'll go, whate'er betide--
  He to his home my way will guide,
  The cottage of the drowned man."      1819.]

  But no--his purpose and his wish
  The Suppliant shews, well as he can;
  Thought Peter whatsoe'er betide
  I'll go, and he my way will guide
  To the cottage of the drowned man.    1820.]


[Variant 64:

1836.

  This utter'd, Peter mounts forthwith    1819.

  This hoping,                            1820.

  Encouraged by this hope, he mounts      1827.

  This hoping, Peter boldly mounts        1832.]


[Variant 65:

1827.

  The    1819.]


[Variant 66:

1836.

  And takes his way ...    1819.]


[Variant 67:

1840.

  Holding ...    1819.]


[Variant 68:

1840 and c.

  What seeks the boy?--the silent dead!    1819.

  Seeking for whom?--...                  1836.]


[Variant 69:

1836.

  Whom he hath sought ...    1819.]


[Variant 70:

1820.

  ... doth rightly spell;    1819.]


[Variant 71:

1836.

  ... noise ...    1819.]


[Variant 72:

1820.

  ... to gain his end    1819.]


[Variant 73:

1845.

  ... footstep ...    1819.]


[Variant 74:

1836.

  ... along a ...    1819.]


[Variant 75: In the editions of 1819 and 1820 the following stanza
occurs:

  The verdant pathway, in and out,
  Winds upwards like a straggling chain;
  And, when two toilsome miles are past,
  Up through the rocks it leads at last
  Into a high and open plain.]


[Variant 76:

1827.

  The ...    1819.]


[Variant 77:

1836.

  How blank!--but whence this rustling sound
  Which, all too long, the pair hath chased!
--A dancing leaf is close behind,         1819.

  But whence that faintly-rustling sound    1820.

  But whence this faintly rustling sound
  By which the pair have long been chased?    c.]


[Variant 78:

1836.

  When Peter spies the withered leaf,
  It yields no cure to his distress--1819.]


[Variant 79:

1836.

  Ha! why this comfortless despair?    1819.]


[Variant 80:

1819.

  ... the Creature's head;    1827.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 81:

1836.

  ... those darting pains,
  As meteors shoot through heaven's wide plains,
  Pass through his bosom--and repass!            1819.]


[Variant 82:

1827.

  Reading, as you or I might read
  At night in any pious book,     1819.]


[Variant 83:

1836.

  ... the good man's taper, 1819.]


[Variant 84:

1836.

  The ghostly word, which thus was fram'd,     1819.

  ... full plainly seen,                       1827.]


[Variant 85:

1836.

  ... to torment the good    1819.]


[Variant 86:

1836.

  I know you, potent Spirits! well,
  How with the feeling and the sense
  Playing, ye govern foes or friends.
  Yok'd to your will, for fearful ends--1819.]


[Variant 87:

1836.

  ... I have often ...    1819.]


[Variant 88:

1836.

  And well I know ...    1819.]


[Variant 89:

1836.

  ... and danc'd ...    1819.]


[Variant 90:

1836.

  ... clearly ...    1819.]


[Variant 91:

1836.

  ... hath ...    1819.]


[Variant 92:

1836.

  ... to confound ...    1819.]


[Variant 93:

1836.

  But now the pair have reach'd a spot
  Where, shelter'd by a rocky cove,    1819.

  Meanwhile the pair                   1820.]


[Variant 94:

1836.

  The building seems, wall, roof, and tower,    1819.]


[Variant 95:

1836.

  Deep sighing as he pass'd along,
  Quoth Peter, "In the shire of Fife,
  'Mid such a ruin, following still
  From land to land a lawless will,    1819.]


[Variant 96:

1827.

  Making, ...      1819.]


[Variant 97:

1836.

  As if confusing darkness came        1819.

  And a confusing                      1832.

  While clouds of swimming darkness came
  Over his eyesight with the sound.       C.]


[Variant 98: _Italics_ were first used in the edition of 1820.]


[Variant 99:

1836.

  A lonely house her dwelling was,    1819.]


[Variant 100:

1819.

  ... her name ...    1820.

The edition of 1827 returns to the text of 1819.]


[Variant 101:

1820.

  Distraction reigns in soul and sense,
  And reason drops in impotence
  From her deserted pinnacle!    1819.]


[Variant 102:

1820.

  ... ears ...    1819.]


[Variant 103:

1836.

  Though clamorous as a hunter's horn
  Re-echoed from a naked rock,
  'Tis from that tabernacle--List!    1819.

  The voice, though clamorous as a horn
  Re-echoed by a naked rock,
  Is from ....                        1832.]


[Variant 104:

1819.

  ... pious ... c.]


[Variant 105:

1836.

  'Tis said, that through prevailing grace    1819.]


[Variant 106:

1836.

  ... shoulders scored
  Meek beast! in memory of the Lord    1819.

  Faithful memorial of the Lord        c.]


[Variant 107:

1836.

  In memory of that solemn day    1819.]


[Variant 108:

1836.

  Towards a gate in open view
  Turns up a narrow lane; ...    1819.]


[Variant 109:

1836.

  Had gone two hundred yards, not more;
  When to a lonely house he came;
  He turn'd aside towards the same
  And stopp'd before the door.       1819.]


[Variant 110:

1836.

  In hope ...       1819.]


[Variant 111:

1827.

  Close at ...       1819.]


[Variant 112:

1832.

  What could he do?--The Woman lay       1819.]


[Variant 113:

1836.

  ... the sufferer ...       1819.]


[Variant 114:

1819.

  ... stair ...       1820.

The edition of 1827 returns to the text of 1819.]


[Variant 115:

1836.

  And to the pillow gives ...       1819.]


[Variant 116:

1827.

  And resting on ...       1819.]


[Variant 117:

1827.

  He turns ...       1819.]


[Variant 118:

1836.

  ... his inward grief and fear--1819.

  ... his sorrow and his fear--C.]


[Variant 119:

1827.

  ... had ...    1819.]


[Variant 120:

1836.

  Towards ...    1819.]


[Variant 121:

1832.

  ... repressed ...      1819.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The title in the two editions of 1819 was 'Peter Bell: A
Tale in Verse.'--Ed.]


[Footnote B: In Dorothy Wordsworth's Alfoxden Journal the following
occurs, under date April 20, 1798: "The moon crescent. 'Peter Bell'
begun."--Ed.]


[Footnote C: 'Romeo and Juliet', act II. scene ii. l. 44. This motto
first appeared on the half-title of 'Peter Bell', second edition, 1819,
under the advertisement of 'Benjamin the Waggoner', its first line being
"What's a Name?" When 'The Waggoner' appeared, a few days afterwards,
the motto stood on its title-page. In the collective edition of the
Poems (1820), it disappeared; but reappeared, in its final position, in
the edition of 1827.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: 'Julius Caesar', act I. scene ii. l. 147.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: Compare 'The Prelude', book iv. l. 47:

  'the sunny seat
  Round the stone table under the dark pine.'

Ed.]


[Footnote F: In the dialect of the North, a hawker of earthen-ware is
thus designated.--W. W. 1819 (second edition).]


[Footnote G: Compare 'The Prelude', book v. l. 448:

  'At last, the dead man, 'mid that beauteous scene
  Of trees and hills and water, bolt upright
  Rose, with his ghastly face, a spectre shape
  Of terror.'

Ed.]


[Footnote H: This and the next stanza were omitted from the edition of
1827, but restored in 1832.--Ed.]


[Footnote I: The notion is very general, that the Cross on the back and
shoulders of this Animal has the origin here alluded to.--W. W. 1819.]


[Footnote J: I cannot suffer this line to pass, without noticing that it
was suggested by Mr. Haydon's noble Picture of Christ's Entry into
Jerusalem.--W. W. 1820. Into the same picture Haydon "introduced
Wordsworth bowing in reverence and awe." See the essay on "The Portraits
of Wordsworth" in a later volume, and the portrait itself, which will be
reproduced in the volume containing the 'Life' of the poet.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: The first and second editions of 'Peter Bell' (1819)
contained, as frontispiece, an engraving by J.C. Bromley, after a
picture by Sir George Beaumont. In 1807, Wordsworth wrote to Sir George:

  "I am quite delighted to hear of your picture for 'Peter Bell' ....
  But remember that no poem of mine will ever be popular, and I am
  afraid that the sale of 'Peter' would not carry the expense of
  engraving .... The people would love the poem of 'Peter Bell', but the
  _public_ (a very different thing) will never love it."

Some days before Wordsworth's 'Peter Bell' was issued in 1819, another
'Peter Bell' was published by Messrs. Taylor and Hessey. It was a parody
written by J. Hamilton Reynolds, and issued as 'Peter Bell, a Lyrical
Ballad', with the sentence on its title page, "I do affirm that I am the
_real_ Simon Pure." The preface, which follows, is too paltry to quote;
and the stanzas which make up the poem contain allusions to the more
trivial of the early "Lyrical Ballads" (Betty Foy, Harry Gill, etc.).
Wordsworth's 'Peter Bell' was published about a week later; and Shelley
afterwards published his 'Peter Bell the Third'. Charles Lamb wrote to
Wordsworth, in May 1819:

  "Dear Wordsworth--I received a copy of 'Peter Bell' a week ago, and I
  hope the author will not be offended if I say I do not much relish it.
  The humour, if it is meant for humour, is forced; and then the
  price!--sixpence would have been dear for it. Mind, I do not mean
  _your_ 'Peter Bell', but _a Peter Bell_, which preceded it about a
  week, and is in every bookseller's shop window in London, the type and
  paper nothing differing from the true one, the preface signed W. W.,
  and the supplementary preface quoting, as the author's words, an
  extract from the supplementary preface to the 'Lyrical Ballads.' Is
  there no law against these rascals? I would have this Lambert Simnel
  whipt at the cart's tail." ('The Letters of Charles Lamb', edited by
  A. Ainger, vol. ii. p. 20.)

Barron Field wrote on the title-page of his copy of the edition of
'Peter Bell', 1819,

  "And his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it."

  1 Kings xiii. 24.--Ed.]



       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT


[Sub-Footnote a: This stanza, which was deleted from every edition of
'Peter Bell' after the two of 1819, was prefixed by Shelley to his poem
of 'Peter Bell the Third', and many of his contemporaries thought that
it was an invention of Shelley's. See the note which follows this poem,
p. 50. Crabb Robinson wrote in his 'Diary', June 6, 1812:

  "Mrs. Basil Montagu told me she had no doubt she had suggested this
  image to Wordsworth by relating to him an anecdote. A person, walking
  in a friend's garden, looking in at a window, saw a company of ladies
  at a table near the window, with countenances _fixed_. In an instant
  he was aware of their condition, and broke the window. He saved them
  from incipient suffocation."

Wordsworth subsequently said that he had omitted the stanza only in
deference to the "unco guid." Crabb Robinson remonstrated with him
against its exclusion.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





LINES,[A] COMPOSED A FEW MILES ABOVE TINTERN ABBEY, ON REVISITING THE
BANKS OF THE WYE DURING A TOUR, JULY 13, 1798 [B]


Composed July 1798.--Published 1798


[July 1798. No poem of mine was composed under circumstances more
pleasant for me to remember than this. I began it upon leaving Tintern,
after crossing the Wye, and concluded it just as I was entering Bristol
in the evening, after a ramble of four or five days, with my sister. Not
a line of it was altered, and not any part of it written down till I
reached Bristol. It was published almost immediately after in the little
volume of which so much has been said in these Notes, the "Lyrical
Ballads," as first published at Bristol by Cottle.--I.F.]


Included among the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.



  Five years have past; five summers, with the length
  Of five long winters![C] and again I hear
  These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs
  With a soft [1] inland murmur. [D]--Once again
  Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs,                      5
  That [2] on a wild secluded scene impress
  Thoughts of more deep seclusion; and connect
  The landscape with the quiet of the sky.
  The day is come when I again repose
  Here, under this dark sycamore, and view                      10
  These plots of cottage-ground, these orchard-tufts,
  Which at this season, with their unripe fruits,
  Are clad in one green hue, and lose themselves
  'Mid groves and copses. [3] Once again I see
  These hedge-rows, hardly hedge-rows, little lines             15
  Of sportive wood run wild: these pastoral farms,
  Green to the very door; and wreaths of smoke
  Sent up, in silence, from among the trees! [E]
  With some uncertain notice, as might seem
  Of vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods,                   20
  Or of some Hermit's cave, where by his fire
  The Hermit sits alone.
      These beauteous forms,
  Through a long absence, have not been to me [4]
  As is a landscape to a blind man's eye:                       25
  But oft, in lonely rooms, and 'mid the din
  Of towns and cities, I have owed to them,
  In hours of weariness, sensations sweet,
  Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart;
  And passing even into my purer mind, [5]                      30
  With tranquil restoration:--feelings too
  Of unremembered pleasure: such, perhaps,
  As have no slight or trivial influence [6]
  On that best portion of a good man's life,
  His little, nameless, unremembered, acts                      35
  Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust,
  To them I may have owed another gift,
  Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood,
  In which the burthen of the mystery,
  In which the heavy and the weary weight                       40
  Of all this unintelligible world,
  Is lightened:--that serene and blessed mood,
  In which the affections gently lead us on,--
  Until, the breath of this corporeal frame
  And even the motion of our human blood                        45
  Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
  In body, and become a living soul:
  While with an eye made quiet by the power
  Of harmony, and the deep power of joy,
  We see into the life of things.                               50
      If this
  Be but a vain belief, yet, oh! how oft--
  In darkness and amid the many shapes
  Of joyless daylight; when the fretful stir
  Unprofitable, and the fever of the world,                     55
  Have hung upon the beatings of my heart--
  How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee,
  O sylvan Wye! thou wanderer thro' the woods, [7]
  How often has my spirit turned to thee!
      And now, with gleams of half-extinguished thought,        60
  With many recognitions dim and faint,
  And somewhat of a sad perplexity,
  The picture of the mind revives again:
  While here I stand, not only with the sense
  Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts               65
  That in this moment there is life and food
  For future years. And so I dare to hope,
  Though changed, no doubt, from what I was when first
  I came among these hills; when like a roe
  I bounded o'er the mountains, by the sides                    70
  Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams,
  Wherever nature led: more like a man
  Flying from something that he dreads, than one
  Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then
  (The coarser pleasures of my boyish days,                     75
  And their glad animal movements all gone by)
  To me was all in all.--I cannot paint
  What then I was. The sounding cataract
  Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock,
  The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,                   80
  Their colours and their forms, were then to me
  An appetite; a feeling and a love,
  That had no need of a remoter charm,
  By thought supplied, nor [8] any interest
  Unborrowed from the eye.--That time is past,                  85
  And all its aching joys are now no more,
  And all its dizzy raptures. [F] Not for this
  Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur; other gifts
  Have followed; for such loss, I would believe,
  Abundant recompence. For I have learned                       90
  To look on nature, not as in the hour
  Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes
  The still, sad music of humanity,
  Nor [9] harsh nor grating, though of ample power
  To chasten and subdue. And I have felt                        95
  A presence that disturbs me with the joy
  Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
  Of something far more deeply interfused,
  Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
  And the round ocean and the living air,                      100
  And the blue sky, and in the mind of man:
  A motion and a spirit, that impels
  All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
  And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still
  A lover of the meadows and the woods,                        105
  And mountains; and of all that we behold
  From this green earth; of all the mighty world
  Of eye, and ear,--both what they half create, [G]
  And what perceive; well pleased to recognise
  In nature and the language of the sense,                     110
  The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,
  The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul
  Of all my moral being.
      Nor perchance,
  If I were not thus taught, should I the more                 115
  Suffer my genial spirits to decay:
  For thou art with me here upon the banks
  Of this fair river; thou my dearest Friend,
  My dear, dear Friend; and in thy voice I catch
  The language of my former heart, and read                    120
  My former pleasures in the shooting lights
  Of thy wild eyes, [H] Oh! yet a little while
  May I behold in thee what I was once,
  My dear, dear Sister! and this prayer I make,
  Knowing that Nature never did betray                         125
  The heart that loved her; 'tis her privilege,
  Through all the years of this our life, to lead
  From joy to joy: for she can so inform
  The mind that is within us, so impress
  With quietness and beauty, and so feed                       130
  With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,
  Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men,
  Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all
  The dreary intercourse of daily life,
  Shall e'er prevail against us, or disturb                    135
  Our cheerful faith, that all which we behold
  Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon
  Shine on thee in thy solitary walk;
  And let the misty mountain-winds be free
  To blow against thee: and, in after years,                   140
  When these wild ecstasies shall be matured
  Into a sober pleasure; when thy mind
  Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms,
  Thy memory be as a dwelling-place
  For all sweet sounds and harmonies; oh! then,                145
  If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief,
  Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts
  Of tender joy wilt thou remember me,
  And these my exhortations! Nor, perchance--
  If I should be where I no more can hear                      150
  Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams
  Of past existence [B]--wilt thou then forget
  That on the banks of this delightful stream
  We stood together; and that I, so long
  A worshipper of Nature, hither came                          155
  Unwearied in that service: rather say
  With warmer love--oh! with far deeper zeal
  Of holier love. Nor wilt thou then forget,
  That after many wanderings, many years
  Of absence, these steep woods and lofty cliffs,              160
  And this green pastoral landscape, were to me
  More dear, both for themselves and for thy sake!



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  ... sweet ...    1798.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Which ...    1798.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  ... with their unripe fruits,
  Among the woods and copses lose themselves,
  Nor, with their green and simple hue, disturb
  The wild green landscape ...                   1798.

  Are clad in one green hue, and lose themselves
  Among the woods and copses, nor disturb        1802.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  ... Though absent long,
  These forms of beauty have not been to me,    1798.]


[Variant 5:

1798.

  ... inmost mind,    MS.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

  As may have had no trivial influence     1798.]


[Variant 7:

1798.

  ... wood,     1798 (some copies).]


[Variant 8:

1836.

  ... or ...    1798.]


[Variant 9:

1800.

  Not ...    1798.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: I have not ventured to call this Poem an Ode; but it was
written with a hope that in the transitions, and the impassioned music
of the versification would be found the principal requisites of that
species of composition.--W. W. 1800.]


[Footnote B: The title in 1798 was 'Lines, written a few miles', etc. In
1815 it assumed its final form.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare the Fenwick note to the poem 'Guilt and Sorrow'
(vol. i. p.78) This visit, five years before, was on his way from "Sarum
plain," on foot and alone--after parting with his friend William
Calvert--to visit another friend, Robert Jones, in Wales.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: The river is not affected by the tides a few miles above
Tintern.--W. W. 1798.]


[Footnote E: In the edition of 1798, an additional line is here
introduced, but it is deleted in the 'errata'. It is

  'And the low copses--coming from the trees.'

Ed.]


[Footnote F: Compare 'The Prelude', book xi. l. 108:

  'Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive,
  But to be young was very Heaven.'

Ed.]


[Footnote G: This line has a close resemblance to an admirable line of
Young, the exact expression of which I cannot recollect.--W. W. 1798.

It is the line:

  'And half-create the wondrous world they see.'

'Night Thoughts', (Night vi. l. 427).--Ed.]


[Footnote H: Compare, in _The Recluse_, canto "Home at Grasmere," l. 91:

  Her voice was like a hidden Bird that sang,
  The thought of her was like a flash of light,
  Or an _unseen_ companionship.

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THERE WAS A BOY


Composed 1798.--Published 1800


[Written in Germany, 1799. This is an extract from the Poem on my own
poetical education. This practice of making an instrument of their own
fingers is known to most boys, though some are more skilful at it than
others. William Raincock of Rayrigg, a fine spirited lad, took the lead
of all my schoolfellows in this art.--I. F.]

This "extract" will be found in the fifth book of 'The Prelude', ll.
364-397. It was included among the "Poems of the Imagination." In the
editions of 1800 to 1832 it had no title, except in the table of
contents. In 1836, the finally adopted title of the poem was given in
the text, as well as in the table of contents.--Ed.



  There was a Boy; ye knew him well, ye cliffs
  And islands of Winander!--many a time,
  At evening, when the earliest stars began [1]
  To move along the edges of the hills,
  Rising or setting, would he stand alone,                        5
  Beneath the trees, or by the glimmering lake;
  And there, with fingers interwoven, both hands
  Pressed closely palm to palm and to his mouth
  Uplifted, he, as through an instrument,
  Blew mimic hootings to the silent owls,                        10
  That they might answer him.--And they would shout
  Across the watery vale, and shout again,
  Responsive to his call,--with quivering peals,
  And long halloos, and screams, and echoes loud
  Redoubled and redoubled; concourse wild                        15
  Of jocund din! [2] And, when there came a pause
  Of silence such as baffled his best skill: [3]
  Then, sometimes, in that silence, while he hung
  Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise
  Has carried far into his heart the voice                       20
  Of mountain-torrents; or the visible scene
  Would enter unawares into his mind
  With all its solemn imagery, its rocks,
  Its woods, and that uncertain heaven received
  Into the bosom of the steady lake.                             25

    This boy was taken from his mates, and died [4]
  In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old. [5]
  Pre-eminent in beauty is the vale
  Where he was born and bred: the church-yard hangs [6]
  Upon a slope above the village-school;                         30
  And, through that church-yard when my way has led
  On summer-evenings, I believe, that there [7]
  A long half-hour together I have stood
  Mute--looking at the grave in which he lies![A] [8]



Wordsworth sent this fragment in MS. to Coleridge, who was then living
at Ratzeburg, and Coleridge wrote in reply on the 10th Dec. 1798:

  "The blank lines gave me as much direct pleasure as was possible in
  the general bustle of pleasure with which I received and read your
  letter. I observed, I remember, that the 'fingers woven,' etc., only
  puzzled me; and though I liked the twelve or fourteen first lines very
  well, yet I liked the remainder much better. Well, now I have read
  them again, they are very beautiful, and leave an affecting
  impression. That

    'uncertain heaven received
    Into the bosom of the steady lake,'

  I should have recognised anywhere; and had I met these lines, running
  wild in the deserts of Arabia, I should have instantly screamed out
  'Wordsworth'!"

The MS. copy of this poem sent to Coleridge probably lacked
the explanatory line,

  'Pressed closely palm to palm and to his mouth,'

as another MS., in the possession of the poet's grandson, lacks it; and
the line was possibly added--as the late Mr. Dykes Campbell
suggested--"in deference to S. T. C.'s expression of puzzlement."

Fletcher Raincock--an elder brother of the William Raincock referred to
in the Fenwick note to this poem, as Wordsworth's schoolfellow at
Hawkshead--was with him also at Cambridge. He attended Pembroke College,
and was second wrangler in 1790. [B] John Fleming of Rayrigg, his
half-brother--the boy with whom Wordsworth used to walk round the lake
of Esthwaite, in the morning before school-time, ("five miles of
pleasant wandering")--was also at St. John's College, Cambridge, at this
time, and had been fifth Wrangler in the preceding year, 1789. He is
referred to both in the second and the fifth books of 'The Prelude'
(see notes to that poem). It is perhaps not unworthy of note that
Wrangham, whose French stanzas on "The Birth of Love" Wordsworth
translated into English, was in the same year--1789--third Wrangler,
second Smith's prizeman, and first Chancellor's medallist; while Robert
Greenwood, "the Minstrel of the Troop," who "blew his flute, alone upon
the rock" in Windermere,--also one of the characters referred to in the
second book of 'The Prelude',--was sixteenth Wrangler in
Wordsworth's year, viz. 1791. William Raincock was at St. John's
College, Cambridge.--Ed.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  ... when the stars had just begun    1800.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  ... a wild scene
  Of mirth and jocund din! ...    1800.

  ... concourse wild              1805.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  ... And, when it chanced
  That pauses of deep silence mock'd his skill,    1800.

  ... and, when a lengthened pause
  Of silence came and baffled his best skill,
                                    'The Prelude', 1850.]


[Variant 4: This and the following line were added in 1805.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  ... ere he was ten years old.    1805.]


[Variant 6:

1845.

  Fair are the woods, and beauteous is the spot,
  The vale where he was born: the Church-yard hangs    1800.

  Fair is the spot, most beautiful the Vale
  Where he was born: the grassy Church-yard hangs      1827.

The text of 1840 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

  And there along that bank when I have pass'd
  At evening, I believe, that near his grave          1800.

  ... I believe, that oftentimes                      1805.

  And through that Church-yard when my way has led    1827.]


[Variant 8:

1815.

  A full half-hour together I have stood,
  Mute--for he died when he was ten years old.    1800.

  Mute--looking at the grave in which he lies.    1805.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In 'The Prelude' the version of 1827 is adopted for the
most part.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: See 'Graduati Cantabrigienses' (1850), by Joseph Romily,
the Registrar to the University 1832-1862.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE TWO THIEVES; OR, THE LAST STAGE OF AVARICE


Composed 1798.--Published 1800


[This is described from the life, as I was in the habit of observing
when a boy at Hawkshead School. Daniel was more than eighty years older
than myself when he was daily, thus occupied, under my notice. No books
have so early taught me to think of the changes to which human life is
subject, and while looking at him I could not but say to myself--we may,
one of us, I or the happiest of my playmates, live to become still more
the object of pity, than this old man, this half-doating
pilferer.--I.F.]

Included among the "Poems referring to the Period of Old Age."--Ed.



  O now that the genius of Bewick [A] were mine,
  And the skill which he learned on the banks of the Tyne,
  Then the Muses might deal with me just as they chose,
  For I'd take my last leave both of verse and of prose. [1]

  What feats would I work with my magical hand!                     5
  Book-learning and books should be banished the land: [2]
  And, for hunger and thirst and such troublesome calls,
  Every ale-house should then have a feast on its walls.

  The traveller would hang his wet clothes on a chair;
  Let them smoke, let them burn, not a straw. Would he care!        10
  For the Prodigal Son, Joseph's Dream and his sheaves,
  Oh, what would they be to my tale of two Thieves?

  The One, yet unbreeched, is not three birthdays old,[3]
  His Grandsire that age more than thirty times told;
  There are ninety good seasons of fair and foul weather           15
  Between them, and both go a-pilfering [4] together.

  With chips is the carpenter strewing his floor?
  Is a cart-load of turf [5] at an old woman's door?
  Old Daniel his hand to the treasure will slide!
  And his Grandson's as busy at work by his side.                  20

  Old Daniel begins; he stops short--and his eye,
  Through the lost look of dotage, is cunning and sly:
  'Tis a look which at this time is hardly his own,
  But tells a plain tale of the days that are flown.

  He once [6] had a heart which was moved by the wires             25
  Of manifold pleasures and many desires:
  And what if he cherished his purse? 'Twas no more
  Than treading a path trod by thousands before.

  'Twas a path trod by thousands; but Daniel is one
  Who went something farther than others have gone, [7]            30
  And now with old Daniel you see how it fares;
  You see to what end he has brought his grey hairs.

  The pair sally forth hand in hand: ere the sun
  Has peered o'er the beeches, their work is begun:
  And yet, into whatever sin they may fall,                        35
  This child but half knows it, and that not at all.

  They hunt through the streets [8] with deliberate tread,
  And each, in his turn, becomes leader or led; [9]
  And, wherever they carry their plots and their wiles,
  Every face in the village is dimpled with smiles.                40

  Neither checked by the rich nor the needy they roam;
  For the grey-headed Sire [10] has a daughter at home,
  Who will gladly repair all the damage that's done;
  And three, were it asked, would be rendered for one.

  Old Man! whom so oft I with pity have eyed,                      45
  I love thee, and love the sweet Boy at thy side:
  Long yet may'st thou live! for a teacher we see
  That lifts up the veil of our nature in thee. [B]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1800.

  Oh! now that the boxwood and graver were mine,
  Of the Poet who lives on the banks of the Tyne,
  Who has plied his rude tools with more fortunate toil
  Than Reynolds e'er brought to his canvas and oil.
                                                       MS. 1798.]


[Variant 2:

1800.

  Then Books, and Book-learning, I'd ring out your knell,
  The Vicar should scarce know an A from an L.           MS. 1798.]


[Variant 3:

1820.

  Little Dan is unbreech'd, he is three birth-days old,    1800.]


[Variant 4:

1837.

  ... a-stealing ...    1800.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  ... of peats ...    1800.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

  Dan once ...    1800.]


[Variant 7:

1800.

  'Twas a smooth pleasant pathway, a gentle descent,
  And leisurely down it, and down it, he went.       MS. 1798.]


[Variant 8:

1802.

  ... street ...       1800.]


[Variant 9:

1837.

  ... is both leader and led;       1800.]


[Variant 10:

1837.

  For grey-headed Dan ...        1800.

  The grey-headed Sire ...       1820.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Thomas Bewick, the wood engraver, born at Cherryburn, near
Newcastle-on-Tyne, in 1753, died 1828. He revived the art of wood
engraving in England. His illustrations--drawn for the 'General History
of British Quadrupeds' (1790), and for his own 'History of British
Birds' (1797 and 1804)--were unrivalled in their way.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Charles Lamb, writing to Wordsworth in 1815, spoke of

  "that delicacy towards aberrations from the strict path, which is so
  fine in the 'Old Thief and the Boy by his side,' which always brings
  water into my eyes."

(See 'Letters of Charles Lamb', edited by Alfred Ainger, vol. i. p.
287.)--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





WRITTEN WITH A SLATE PENCIL UPON A STONE, THE LARGEST OF A HEAP LYING
NEAR A DESERTED QUARRY, UPON ONE OF THE ISLANDS [A] AT RYDAL


Composed 1798.--Published 1800


Included among the "Inscriptions."--Ed.




  Stranger! this hillock of mis-shapen stones
  Is not a Ruin spared or made by time, [1]
  Nor, as perchance thou rashly deem'st, the Cairn
  Of some old British Chief: 'tis nothing more
  Than the rude embryo of a little Dome                          5
  Or Pleasure-house, once destined to be built [2]
  Among the birch-trees of this rocky isle. [3]
  But, as it chanced, Sir William having learned
  That from the shore a full-grown man might wade,
  And make himself a freeman of this spot                       10
  At any hour he chose, the prudent Knight [4]
  Desisted, and the quarry and the mound
  Are monuments of his unfinished task.
  The block on which these lines are traced, perhaps,
  Was once selected as the corner-stone                         15
  Of that [5] intended Pile, which would have been
  Some quaint odd plaything of elaborate skill,
  So that, I guess, the linnet and the thrush,
  And other little builders who dwell here,
  Had wondered at the work. But blame him not,                  20
  For old Sir William was a gentle Knight,
  Bred in this vale, to which he appertained [6]
  With all his ancestry. Then peace to him,
  And for the outrage which he had devised
  Entire forgiveness!--But if thou art one                      25
  On fire with thy impatience to become
  An inmate of these mountains,--if, disturbed
  By beautiful conceptions, thou hast hewn
  Out of the quiet rock the elements
  Of thy trim Mansion destined soon to blaze                    30
  In snow white splendour, [B] [7]--think again; and, taught
  By old Sir William and his quarry, leave
  Thy fragments to the bramble and the rose;
  There let the vernal slow warm sun himself,
  And let the redbreast hop from stone to stone.                35



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  Is not a ruin of the ancient time,      1800.

  ... antique ...       MS.]


[Variant 2:

1802.

  ... which was to have been built       1800.]


[Variant 3:

1800.

  Of some old British warrior: so, to speak
  The honest truth, 'tis neither more nor less
  Than the rude germ of what was to have been
  A pleasure-house, and built upon this isle.      MS.]


[Variant 4:

1837.

  ... the Knight forthwith       1800.]


[Variant 5:

1837.

  Of the ...    1800.]


[Variant 6:

1800.

  Bred here, and to this valley appertained    MS. 1798.]


[Variant 7:

1800.

  ... glory, ...    1802.

The text of 1815 returns to that of 1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In a MS. copy this is given as "the lesser Island."--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Wordsworth's

  "objections to white, as a colour, in large spots or masses in
  landscape,"

in his 'Guide through the district of the Lakes' (section third).--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





1799


The poems belonging to the year 1799 were chiefly, if not wholly,
composed at Goslar, in Germany; and all, with three exceptions, appeared
in the second edition of "Lyrical Ballads" (1800). The exceptions were
the following: The lyric beginning, "I travelled among unknown men,"
which was first published in the "Poems" of 1807; and two fragments from
'The Prelude', viz. 'The Influence of Natural Objects' (which appeared
in 'The Friend' in 1809), and 'The Simplon Pass' (first published in the
8vo edition of the Poems in 1845).

Wordsworth reached Goslar on the 6th of October 1798, and left it on the
10th of February 1799. It is impossible to determine the precise order
in which the nineteen or twenty poems associated with that city were
composed. But it is certain that the fragment on the immortal boy of
Windermere--whom its cliffs and islands knew so well--was written in
1798, and not in 1799 (as Wordsworth himself states); because Coleridge
sent a letter to his friend, thanking him for a MS. copy of these lines,
and commenting on them, of which the date is "Ratzeburg, Dec. 10, 1798."
For obvious reasons, however, I place the fragments originally meant to
be parts of 'The Recluse' together; and, since Wordsworth gave the date
1799 to the others, it would be gratuitous to suppose that he erred in
reference to them all, because we know that his memory failed him in
reference to one of the series. Therefore, although he spent more than
twice as many days in 1798 as in 1799 at Goslar, I set down this group
of poems as belonging to 1799, rather than to the previous year. It will
be seen that, after placing all the poems of this Goslar period in the
year to which they belong, it is possible also to group them according
to their subject matter, without violating chronological order. I
therefore put the fragments, afterwards incorporated in 'The Prelude',
together. These are naturally followed by 'Nutting'--a poem intended for
'The Prelude', but afterwards excluded, as inappropriate. The five poems
referring to "Lucy" are placed in sequence, and the same is done with
the four "Matthew" poems. A small group of four poems follows
appropriately, viz. 'To a Sexton', 'The Danish Boy', 'Lucy Gray', and
'Ruth'; while the Fenwick note almost necessitates our placing the
'Poet's Epitaph' immediately after the Lines 'Written in Germany'; and,
with Wordsworth's life at Goslar, we naturally associate five
things--the cold winter, 'The Prelude', the "Lucy" and the "Matthew"
poems, and the 'Poet's Epitaph'.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





INFLUENCE OF NATURAL OBJECTS IN CALLING FORTH AND STRENGTHENING THE
IMAGINATION IN BOYHOOD AND EARLY YOUTH

FROM AN UNPUBLISHED POEM

[This extract is reprinted from "THE FRIEND."[A]]

Composed 1799.--Published 1809

It was included by Wordsworth among the "Poems referring to the Period
of Childhood."--Ed.




  Wisdom and Spirit of the universe!
  Thou Soul, that art the Eternity of thought!
  And giv'st [1] to forms and images a breath
  And everlasting motion! not in vain,
  By day or star-light, thus from my first dawn              5
  Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me
  The passions that build up our human soul;
  Not [2] with the mean and vulgar works of Man:
  But with high objects, with enduring things,
  With life and nature: purifying thus                      10
  The elements of feeling and of thought,
  And sanctifying by such discipline
  Both pain and fear,--until we recognise
  A grandeur in the beatings of the heart.

    Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me                15
  With stinted kindness. In November days,
  When vapours rolling down the valleys [3] made
  A lonely scene more lonesome; among woods
  At noon; and 'mid the calm of summer nights,
  When, by the margin of the trembling lake,                20
  Beneath the gloomy hills, homeward I went [4]
  In solitude, such intercourse was mine:
  Mine was it in the fields [5] both day and night,
  And by the waters, all the summer long.
  And in the frosty season, when the sun                    25
  Was set, and, visible for many a mile,
  The cottage-windows through the twilight blazed, [6]
  I heeded not the summons: happy time
  It was indeed for all of us; for me [7]
  It was a time of rapture! Clear and loud                  30
  The village-clock tolled six--I wheeled about,
  Proud and exulting like an untired horse
  That cares not for his home. [8]--All shod with steel
  We hissed along the polished ice, in games
  Confederate, imitative of the chase                       35
  And woodland pleasures,--the resounding horn,
  The pack loud-chiming, [9] and the hunted hare.
  So through the darkness and the cold we flew,
  And not a voice was idle: with the din
  Smitten, [10] the precipices rang aloud;                  40
  The leafless trees and every icy crag
  Tinkled like iron; while far-distant hills [11]
  Into the tumult sent an alien sound
  Of melancholy, not unnoticed while the stars,
  Eastward, were sparkling clear, and in the west           45
  The orange sky of evening died away.

    Not seldom from the uproar I retired
  Into a silent bay, or sportively
  Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng,
  To cut across the reflex [12] of a star;                  50
  Image, that, flying still before me, gleamed
  Upon the glassy plain: and oftentimes, [13]
  When we had given our bodies to the wind,
  And all the shadowy banks on either side
  Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still        55
  The rapid line of motion, then at once
  Have I, reclining back upon my heels,
  Stopped short; yet still the solitary cliffs
  Wheeled by me--even as if the earth had rolled
  With visible motion her diurnal round!                    60
  Behind me did they stretch in solemn train,
  Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched
  Till all was tranquil as a summer sea. [14]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1809.

  That givest ...       'The Prelude', 1850.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

  Nor ...     1809.]


[Variant 3:

1809.

  ... valley ...    The Prelude', 1850.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  ... I homeward went    1809.]


[Variant 5:

1845.

  'Twas mine among the fields ...    1809.]


[Variant 6:

1809.

  ... blazed through twilight gloom,    'The Prelude', 1850.]


[Variant 7:

1815.

  ... to me    1809.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

  ... car'd not for its home--...    1809.

  ... cares not ...                   1815.]


[Variant 9:

1840.

  ... loud bellowing ...    1809.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  Meanwhile ...    1809.]


[Variant 11:

1845.

  ... while the distant hills    1809.]


[Variant 12:

1827.

  To cut across the image ...          1809.

  To cross the bright reflection ...   1820.]


[Variant 13:

1820.

  That gleam'd upon the ice; and oftentimes    1809.

(This line occupied the place of lines 51-52 of the final text.)

  That fled, and, flying still before me, gleamed
  Upon the glassy plain; and oftentimes,    'The Prelude', 1850.]


[Variant 14:

1809.

  ... as a dreamless sleep.    'The Prelude', 1850.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The title of the fragment, as it appeared in 'The Friend',
No. 19, (Dec. 28, 1809,) was 'Growth of Genius from the Influences of
Natural Objects on the Imagination, in Boyhood and Early Youth'. It
first appeared in Wordsworth's Poems in the edition of 1815. It was
afterwards included in the first book of 'The Prelude', l. 401.

The lake referred to with its "silent bays" and "shadowy banks" is that
of Esthwaite; the village clock is that of Hawkshead (see the footnotes
to 'The Prelude'). The only physical accomplishment in which Wordsworth
thought he excelled was skating, an accomplishment in which his brother
poet and acquaintance, Klopstock, also excelled.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE SIMPLON PASS [A]


Composed 1799.--Published 1845


Included among the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




--Brook and road
  Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy Pass, [1]
  And with them did we journey several hours
  At a slow step. [2] The immeasurable height
  Of woods decaying, never to be decayed,                        5
  The stationary blasts of waterfalls,
  And in the narrow rent, at every turn,
  Winds thwarting winds bewildered and forlorn,
  The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,
  The rocks that muttered close upon our ears,                  10
  Black drizzling crags that spake by the wayside
  As if a voice were in them, the sick sight
  And giddy prospect of the raving stream,
  The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens,
  Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light--15
  Were all like workings of one mind, the features
  Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree,
  Characters of the great Apocalypse,
  The types and symbols of Eternity,
  Of first, and last, and midst, and without end.               20



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  ... gloomy strait,    'The Prelude', 1850.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  ... pace ...    'The Prelude', 1850.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This is an extract from the sixth book of 'The Prelude', l.
621. It refers to Wordsworth's first experience of Switzerland, when he
crossed the Alps by the Simplon route, in 1790, in company with his
friend Robert Jones.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





NUTTING


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


[Written in Germany; intended as part of a poem on my own life, but
struck out as not being wanted there. Like most of my schoolfellows I
was an impassioned Nutter. For this pleasure, the Vale of Esthwaite,
abounding in coppice wood, furnished a very wide range. These verses
arose out of the remembrance of feelings I had often had when a boy, and
particularly in the extensive woods that still stretch from the side of
Esthwaite Lake towards Graythwaite, the seat of the ancient family of
Sandys.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.



--It seems a day
  (I speak of one from many singled out)
  One of those heavenly days that [1] cannot die;
  When, in the eagerness of boyish hope, [2]
  I left our cottage-threshold, [A] sallying forth [3]                5
  With a huge wallet o'er my shoulders slung, [4]
  A nutting-crook in hand; and turned [5] my steps
  Tow'rd some far-distant wood, [6] a Figure quaint,
  Tricked out in proud disguise of cast-off weeds
  Which for that service had been husbanded,                         10
  By exhortation of my frugal Dame--[7]
  Motley accoutrement, of power to smile
  At thorns, and brakes, and brambles,--and, in truth,
  More ragged than need was! O'er pathless rocks,
  Through beds of matted fern, and tangled thickets,                 15
  Forcing my way, I came to one dear nook [8]
  Unvisited, where not a broken bough
  Drooped with its withered leaves, ungracious sign
  Of devastation; but the hazels rose
  Tall and erect, with tempting clusters [9] hung,                   20
  A virgin scene!--A little while I stood,
  Breathing with such suppression of the heart
  As joy delights in; and, with wise restraint
  Voluptuous, fearless of a rival, eyed
  The banquet;--or beneath the trees I sate                          25
  Among the flowers, and with the flowers I played;
  A temper known to those, who, after long
  And weary expectation, have been blest
  With sudden happiness beyond all hope.
  Perhaps it was a bower beneath whose leaves                        30
  The violets of five seasons re-appear
  And fade, unseen by any human eye;
  Where fairy water-breaks do murmur on
  For ever; and I saw the sparkling foam,
  And--with my cheek on one of those green stones                    35
  That, fleeced with moss, under [10] the shady trees,
  Lay round me, scattered like a flock of sheep--
  I heard the murmur and the murmuring sound,
  In that sweet mood when pleasure loves to pay
  Tribute to ease; and, of its joy secure,                           40
  The heart luxuriates with indifferent things,
  Wasting its kindliness on stocks and stones,
  And on the vacant air. Then up I rose,
  And dragged to earth both branch and bough, with crash
  And merciless ravage: and the shady nook                           45
  Of hazels, and the green and mossy bower,
  Deformed and sullied, patiently gave up
  Their quiet being: and, unless I now
  Confound my present feelings with the past;
  Ere from the mutilated bower I turned [11]                         50
  Exulting, rich beyond the wealth of kings,
  I felt a sense of pain when I beheld
  The silent trees, and saw the intruding sky.--[12]
  Then, dearest Maiden, move along these shades
  In gentleness of heart; with gentle hand                           55
  Touch--for there is a spirit in the woods.



The woods round Esthwaite Lake have undergone considerable change since
Wordsworth's school-days at Hawkshead; but hazel coppice is still
abundant to the south and west of the Lake.--Ed.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... which ...    1800.]


[Variant 2: This line was added in the edition of 1827.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  When forth I sallied from our cottage-door,    1800.]


[Variant 4:

1832.

  And with a wallet o'er my shoulder slung,     1800.

  With a huge wallet o'er my shoulder slung,    1815.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  ... I turn'd ...    1800.]


[Variant 6:

1836.

  Towards the distant woods, ...    1800.

  Toward ...                        1832.]


[Variant 7:

1815.

  ... of Beggar's weeds
  Put on for the occasion, by advice
  And exhortation ...                 1800.]


[Variant 8:

1836.

  ... Among the woods,
  And o'er the pathless rocks, I forc'd my way
  Until, at length, I came ...        1800.]


[Variant 9:

1845.

  ... milk-white clusters ...    1800.]


[Variant 10:

1845.

  ... beneath ...    1800.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

  Even then, when from the bower I turn'd away,    1800.]


[Variant 12:

1836.

  ... and the intruding sky.--1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The house at which I was boarded during the time I was at
School.--W. W. 1800.]





       *       *       *       *       *





WRITTEN IN GERMANY, ON ONE OF THE COLDEST DAYS OF THE CENTURY


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


I must apprize the Reader that the stoves in North Germany generally
have the impression of a galloping Horse upon them, this being part of
the Brunswick Arms.--W. W. 1800.

[A bitter winter it was when these verses were composed by the side of
my sister, in our lodgings at a draper's house, in the romantic imperial
town of Goslar, on the edge of the Hartz Forest. In this town the German
emperors of the Franconian Line were accustomed to keep their court, and
it retains vestiges of ancient splendour. So severe was the cold of this
winter, that when we passed out of the parlour warmed by the stove, our
cheeks were struck by the air as by cold iron. I slept in a room over a
passage that was not ceiled. The people of the house used to say rather
unfeelingly, that they expected I should be frozen to death some night;
but with the protection of a pelisse lined with fur, and a dog's skin
bonnet, such as was worn by the peasants, I walked daily on the
ramparts, or on a sort of public ground or garden, in which was a pond.
Here I had no companion but a kingfisher, a beautiful creature that used
to glance by me. I consequently became much attached to it. During these
walks I composed the poem that follows, _A Poet's Epitaph_.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection." Wordsworth originally
gave to this poem the title "The Fly," but erased it before
publication.--Ed.




  A plague on [1] your languages, German and Norse!
  Let me have the song of the kettle;
  And the tongs and the poker, instead of that horse
  That gallops away with such fury and force
  On this [2] dreary dull plate of black metal.                       5
  [3]
  See that Fly, [4]--a disconsolate creature! perhaps
  A child of the field or the grove;
  And, sorrow for him! the [5] dull treacherous heat
  Has seduced the poor fool from his winter retreat,
  And he creeps to the edge of my stove.                             10

  Alas! how he fumbles about the domains
  Which this comfortless oven environ!
  He cannot find out in what track he must crawl,
  Now back to the tiles, then in search of the wall, [6]
  And now on the brink of the iron.                                  15

  Stock-still there he stands like a traveller bemazed:
  The best of his skill he has tried;
  His feelers, methinks, I can see him put forth
  To the east and the west, to [7] the south and the north
  But he finds neither guide-post nor guide.                         20

  His spindles [8] sink under him, foot, leg, and thigh!
  His eyesight and hearing are lost;
  Between life and death his blood freezes and thaws;
  And his two pretty pinions of blue dusky gauze
  Are glued to his sides by the frost.                               25

  No brother, no mate [9] has he near him--while I
  Can draw warmth from the cheek of my Love;
  As blest and as glad, in this desolate gloom,
  As if green summer grass were the floor of my room,
  And woodbines were hanging above.                                  30

  Yet, God is my witness, thou small helpless Thing!
  Thy life I would gladly sustain
  Till summer come [10] up from the south, and with crowds
  Of thy brethren a march thou should'st sound through the clouds.
  And back to the forests again!                                     35



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1820.

  A fig for ...    1800.]


[Variant 2:

1800.

  On his ...    1827.

The text of 1837 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 3:

  Our earth is no doubt made of excellent stuff,
  But her pulses beat slower and slower,
  The weather in Forty was cutting and rough,
  And then, as Heaven knows, the glass stood low enough,
  And _now_ it is four degrees lower.

This stanza occurs only in the editions of 1800 to 1815.]


[Variant 4:

1820.

  Here's a Fly, ...      1800.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  ... this ...       1800.]


[Variant 6:

1837.

  ... and not back to the wall,       1800.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

  ... and the South ...      1800.]


[Variant 8:

1845.

  See! his spindles ...      1800.

  How his spindles ...       1827.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

  ... no Friend ...                            1800.

  No brother has he, no companion, while I       MS.]


[Variant 10:

1837.

  ... comes ...      1800.]





       *       *       *       *       *





A POET'S EPITAPH


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.




  Art thou a Statist [1] in the van
  Of public conflicts [2] trained and bred?
--First learn to love one living man;
  _Then_ may'st thou think upon the dead.

  A Lawyer art thou?--draw not nigh!                         5
  Go, carry to some fitter place
  The keenness of that practised eye,
  The hardness of that sallow face. [3]

  Art thou a Man of purple cheer?
  A rosy Man, right plump to see?                           10
  Approach; yet, Doctor, [A] not too near,
  This grave no cushion is for thee.

  Or art thou one of gallant pride, [4]
  A Soldier and no man of chaff?
  Welcome!--but lay thy sword aside,                        15
  And lean upon a peasant's staff.

  Physician art thou?--one, all eyes,
  Philosopher!--a fingering slave,
  One that would peep and botanize
  Upon his mother's grave?                                  20

  Wrapt closely in thy sensual fleece,
  O turn aside,--and take, I pray,
  That he below may rest in peace,
  Thy ever-dwindling soul, away! [5]

  A Moralist perchance appears;                             25
  Led, Heaven knows how! to this poor sod:
  And he has neither eyes nor ears;
  Himself his world, and his own God;

  One to whose smooth-rubbed soul can cling
  Nor form, nor feeling, great or [6] small;                30
  A reasoning, self-sufficing [7] thing,
  An intellectual All-in-all!

  Shut close the door; press down the latch;
  Sleep in thy intellectual crust;
  Nor lose ten tickings of thy watch                        35
  Near this unprofitable dust.

  But who is He, with modest looks,
  And clad in homely russet brown? [B]
  He murmurs near the running brooks
  A music sweeter than their own.                           40

  He is retired as noontide dew,
  Or fountain in a noon-day grove;
  And you must love him, ere to you
  He will seem worthy of your love.

  The outward shows of sky and earth,                       45
  Of hill and valley, he has viewed;
  And impulses of deeper birth
  Have come to him in solitude.

  In common things that round us lie
  Some random truths he can impart,--50
  The harvest of a quiet eye
  That broods and sleeps on his own heart.

  But he is weak; both Man and Boy,
  Hath been an idler in the land;
  Contented if he might enjoy                               55
  The things which others understand.

--Come hither in thy hour of strength;
  Come, weak as is a breaking wave!
  Here stretch thy body at full length;
  Or build thy house upon this grave.                       60




See the Fenwick note to the poem, 'Written in Germany, on one of the
coldest Days of the Century' (p. 73).

  "The 'Poet's Epitaph' is disfigured to my taste by the common satire
  upon parsons and lawyers in the beginning, and the coarse epithet of
  'pin-point', in the sixth stanza. All the rest is eminently good, and
  your own."

(Charles Lamb to William Wordsworth, January 1801.)--Ed.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  ... Statesman, ...       1800.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  Of public business ...       1800.]


[Variant 3:

1820.

  ... to some other place
  The hardness of thy coward eye,
  The falsehood of thy sallow face.       1800.]


[Variant 4:

1820.

  Art thou a man of gallant pride,      1800.]


[Variant 5:

1837.

  Thy pin-point of a soul away!           1800.

  That abject thing, thy soul, away!      1815.]


[Variant 6:

1837.

  ... nor ...      1800.]


[Variant 7:

1800.

  ... self-sufficient ...      1802.

The edition of 1815 returns to the text of 1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: D. D., not M. D. The physician is referred to in the fifth
stanza.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Thomson's description of the Bard, in his 'Castle
of Indolence' (canto ii., stanza xxxiii.):

  He came, the bard, a little Druid wight,
  Of withered aspect; but his eye was keen,
  With sweetness mixed. In russet brown bedight,
  He crept along, etc.

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"STRANGE FITS OF PASSION HAVE I KNOWN"


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


[Written in Germany, 1799.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems founded on the Affections." In MS. Wordsworth gave, as
the title, "A Reverie," but erased it.--Ed.



  Strange fits of passion have I known: [1]
  And I will dare to tell,
  But in the Lover's ear alone,
  What once to me befel.

  When she I loved looked every day                         5
  Fresh as a rose in June, [2]
  I to her cottage bent my way,
  Beneath an [3] evening moon.

  Upon the moon I fixed my eye,
  All over the wide lea;                                   10
  With quickening pace my horse drew nigh [4]
  Those paths so dear to me.

  And now we reached the orchard-plot;
  And, as we climbed the hill,
  The sinking moon to Lucy's cot                           15
  Came near, and nearer still. [5]

  In one of those sweet dreams I slept,
  Kind Nature's gentlest boon!
  And all the while my eyes I kept
  On the descending moon.                                  20

  My horse moved on; hoof after hoof
  He raised, and never stopped:
  When down behind the cottage roof,
  At once, the bright moon dropped. [6]

  What fond and wayward thoughts will slide                25
  Into a Lover's head!
  "O mercy!" to myself I cried,
  "If Lucy should be dead!"



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1832.

  ... I have known,      1800.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  When she I lov'd, was strong and gay
  And like a rose in June,      1800.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  ... the ...      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  My horse trudg'd on, and we drew nigh      1800.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

  Towards the roof of Lucy's cot
  The moon descended still. [a]       1800.]


[Variant 6:

1815.

  ... the planet dropp'd.       1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: Compare the lines in Arthur Hugh Clough's poem, 'The
Stream of Life':

  And houses stand on either hand
  And thou descendest still.

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"SHE DWELT AMONG THE UNTRODDEN WAYS"


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


One of the "Poems founded on the Affections." In the edition of 1800 it
is entitled 'Song'.--Ed.




  She dwelt among the untrodden ways
  Beside the springs of Dove,
  A Maid whom there were none to praise
    And very few to love: [1]

  A violet by a mossy stone                         5
    Half hidden from the eye!
--Fair as a star, when only one
    Is shining in the sky.

  She lived [2] unknown, and few could know
    When Lucy ceased to be;                        10
  But she is in her grave, and, oh,
    The difference to me!



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1800.

  A very few ...      1802.

The text of the edition of 1805 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 2: The word "lived" was italicised in the edition of 1800
only.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"I TRAVELLED AMONG UNKNOWN MEN"


Composed 1799.-Published 1807


One of the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  I travelled among unknown men,
    In lands beyond the sea;
  Nor, England! did I know till then
    What love I bore to thee.

  'Tis past, that melancholy dream!                 5
    Nor will I quit thy shore
  A second time; for still I seem
    To love thee more and more.

  Among thy mountains did I feel
    The joy of my desire; [1]                      10
  And she I cherished turned her wheel
    Beside an English fire.

  Thy mornings showed, thy nights concealed
    The bowers where Lucy played;
  And thine too is the last green field            15
    That Lucy's eyes surveyed. [2] [A]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

  The gladness of desire;       MS.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  And thine is, too, the last green field
  Which ...         1807.

  That ...          1815.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Sara Coleridge's comment on this poem in the
'Biographia Literaria' (1847), vol. ii. chap. ix. p. 173. Also Mrs.
Oliphant's remarks in her 'Literary History of the Nineteenth Century',
vol. i. pp. 306-9.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"THREE YEARS SHE GREW IN SUN AND SHOWER"


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


[1799. Composed in the Hartz Forest.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Imagination." It has no title in any edition,
but from 1820 to 1836 the second page occupied by the poem is headed
"Lucy." In the editions of 1836 to 1843 it is called "Lucy" in the list
of contents.--Ed.




  Three years she grew in sun and shower,
  Then Nature said, "A lovelier flower
  On earth was never sown;
  This Child I to myself will take;
  She shall be mine, and I will make                     5
  A Lady of my own.

  "Myself will to my darling be
  Both law and impulse: [1] and with me
  The Girl, in rock and plain,
  In earth and heaven, in glade and bower,              10
  Shall feel an overseeing power
  To kindle or restrain.

  "She shall be sportive as the fawn
  That wild with glee across the lawn
  Or up the mountain springs;                           15
  And her's shall be the breathing balm,
  And her's the silence and the calm
  Of mute insensate things.

  "The floating clouds their state shall lend
  To her; for her the willow bend;                      20
  Nor shall she fail to see
  Even in the motions of the Storm
  Grace that shall mould the Maiden's form [2]
  By silent sympathy.

  "The stars of midnight shall be dear                  25
  To her; and she shall lean her ear
  In many a secret place
  Where rivulets dance their wayward round,
  And beauty born of murmuring sound [A]
  Shall pass into her face.                             30

  "And vital feelings of delight
  Shall rear her form to stately height,
  Her virgin bosom swell;
  Such thoughts to Lucy I will give
  While she and I together live                         35
  Here in this happy dell."

  Thus Nature spake--The work was done--
  How soon my Lucy's race was run!
  She died, and left to me
  This heath, this calm, and quiet scene;               40
  The memory of what has been,
  And never more will be. [B]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1800.

  Her Teacher I myself will be,
  She is my darling;--...

MS. 1801, and the edition of 1802.
The edition of 1805 returns to the text of 1800.]


[Variant 2:

1800.

A reading--printed in the edition of 1800, but replaced in its list of
'errata' by that given in the text--may be quoted here,

  A beauty that shall mould her form ...      1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Dryden's 'Indian Emperor', iv. 3.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: On Oct 9, 1800, S. T. Coleridge, in writing to Sir Humphry
Davy of his own 'Christabel', said,

  "I would rather have written 'Ruth', and 'Nature's Lady,' than a
  million such poems."

This poem was printed in 'The Morning Post', March 2nd, 1801.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"A SLUMBER DID MY SPIRIT SEAL"


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


[Written in Germany.--I.F.]

Included among the "Poems of the Imagination." [A]--Ed.




  A slumber did my spirit seal;
    I had no human fears:
  She seemed a thing that could not feel
    The touch of earthly years.

  No motion has she now, no force;                    5
    She neither hears nor sees;
  Rolled round in earth's diurnal course,
    With rocks, and stones, and trees. [B]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: It was one of the "Lucy" Poems. In his instructions to the
printer in 1807, Wordsworth told him to insert "I travelled among
unknown men" after "A slumber did my spirit seal."--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Suckling's 'Fragmenta Aurea' (The Tragedy of
Brennoralt), p. 170, edition 1658.

  Heavens! shall this fresh ornament of the world,
  These precious love-lines, pass with other common things,
  Amongst the wastes of time? What pity 'twere.

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





ADDRESS TO THE SCHOLARS OF THE VILLAGE SCHOOL OF--


Composed 1798 or 1799.--Published 1842


[Composed at Goslar, in Germany.--I.F.]

First published in "Poems, chiefly of Early and Late Years," and
included, in 1845, among the "Epitaphs and Elegiac Pieces."--Ed.




  I come, ye little noisy Crew,
  Not long your pastime to prevent;
  I heard the blessing which to you
  Our common Friend and Father sent.
  I kissed his cheek before he died;                     5
  And when his breath was fled,
  I raised, while kneeling by his side,
  His hand:--it dropped like lead.
  Your hands, dear Little-ones, do all
  That can be done, will never fall                     10
  Like his till they are dead.
  By night or day blow foul or fair,
  Ne'er will the best of all your train
  Play with the locks of his white hair,
  Or stand between his knees again.                     15

    Here did he sit confined for hours;
  But he could see the woods and plains,
  Could hear the wind and mark the showers
  Come streaming down the streaming panes.
  Now stretched beneath his grass-green mound           20
  He rests a prisoner of the ground.
  He loved the breathing air,
  He loved the sun, but if it rise
  Or set, to him where now he lies,
  Brings not a moment's care.                           25

  Alas! what idle words; but take
  The Dirge which for our Master's sake
  And yours, love prompted me to make.
  The rhymes so homely in attire
  With learned ears may ill agree,                      30
  But chanted by your Orphan Quire
  Will make a touching melody.


  DIRGE

  Mourn, Shepherd, near thy old grey stone;
  Thou Angler, by the silent flood;
  And mourn when thou art all alone,                    35
  Thou Woodman, in the distant wood!

  Thou one blind Sailor, rich in joy
  Though blind, thy tunes in sadness hum;
  And mourn, thou poor half-witted Boy!
  Born deaf, and living deaf and dumb.                  40

  Thou drooping sick Man, bless the Guide
  Who checked or turned thy headstrong youth,
  As he before had sanctified
  Thy infancy with heavenly truth.

  Ye Striplings, light of heart and gay,                45
  Bold settlers on some foreign shore,
  Give, when your thoughts are turned this way,
  A sigh to him whom we deplore.

  For us who here in funeral strain
  With one accord our voices raise,                     50
  Let sorrow overcharged with pain
  Be lost in thankfulness and praise.

  And when our hearts shall feel a sting
  From ill we meet or good we miss,
  May touches of his memory bring                       55
  Fond healing, like a mother's kiss.


  BY THE SIDE OF THE GRAVE SOME YEARS AFTER

  Long time his pulse hath ceased to beat;
  But benefits, his gift, we trace--
  Expressed in every eye we meet
  Round this dear Vale, his native place.               60

  To stately Hall and Cottage rude
  Flowed from his life what still they hold,
  Light pleasures, every day, renewed;
  And blessings half a century old.

  Oh true of heart, of spirit gay,                      65
  Thy faults, where not already gone
  From memory, prolong their stay
  For charity's sweet sake alone.

  Such solace find we for our loss;
  And what beyond this thought we crave                 70
  Comes in the promise from the Cross,
  Shining upon thy happy grave.



To this poem, when first published in the "Poems of Early and Late
Years" (1842), Wordsworth appended the note, "See, upon the subject of
the three foregoing pieces, 'The Fountain' [p. 91], etc. etc. in the
fifth volume of the Author's Poems." He thus connects it with the poems
referring to Matthew in such a way that it may be said to belong to that
series; and, while he assigned it to the year 1798, both in the edition
of 1845, and in that of 1849-50, it is quite possible that it was
written in 1799. "The village school" was the Grammar School of
Hawkshead, where Wordsworth spent his boyhood; and the schoolmaster was
the Rev. William Taylor, M. A., Emmanuel College, Cambridge, who was the
third of the four masters who taught in it during Wordsworth's residence
there. He was master from 1782 to 1786. Just before his death he sent
for the upper boys of the school (amongst whom was Wordsworth), and
calling them into his room, took leave of them with a solemn blessing.
This farewell doubtless suggested the lines:

         'the blessing which to you
  Our common Friend and Father sent.'

Mr. Taylor was buried in Cartmell Churchyard. In 'The Prelude',
Wordsworth writes of him as "an honoured teacher of my youth;" and there
describes, with some minuteness, a visit to his grave. (See book x. l.
532.) It will be seen, however, from the Fenwick note to 'Matthew', that
the Hawkshead Schoolmaster, like the Wanderer in 'The Excursion', was
"made up of several both of his class and men of other occupations;" but
of the four masters who taught Wordsworth at Hawkshead--Peake,
Christian, Taylor, and Bowman--Taylor was far the ablest, the most
interesting, and the most beloved by the boys, and it was doubtless the
memory of this man that gave rise to the above poem, and the four which
follow it. He was but thirty-two years old when he died, 12th June,
1786. This fact, taken in connection with line 14 of the 'Address', may
illustrate the composite character of 'Matthew'.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





MATTHEW


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


In the School of--is a tablet on which are inscribed, in gilt letters,
the names of the several persons who have been Schoolmasters there since
the foundation of the School, with the time at which they entered upon
and quitted their office. Opposite one of those names the Author wrote
the following lines.--W. W. 1800.

[Such a tablet as is here spoken of continued to be preserved in
Hawkshead School, though the inscriptions were not brought down to our
time. This, and other poems connected with Matthew, would not gain by a
literal detail of facts. Like the Wanderer in 'The Excursion' this
Schoolmaster was made up of several, both of his class and men of other
occupations. I do not ask pardon for what there is of untruth in such
verses, considered strictly as matters of fact. It is enough, if, being
true and consistent in spirit, they move and teach in a manner not
unworthy of a Poet's calling.--I.F.] [A]

In the editions of 1800 to 1820 this poem had no title except the note
prefixed to it above, although in the Table of Contents it was called
'Lines written on a Tablet in a School'. From 1820-32 "Matthew" is the
page heading, though there is no title. In the editions of 1827 and 1832
it was named, in the Table of Contents, by its first line, "If Nature,
for a favourite child." In 1837 it was entitled 'Matthew'. It was
included among the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection." The Tablet, with
the names of the Masters inscribed on it, still exists in Hawkshead
School.--Ed.




  If Nature, for a favourite child,
  In thee hath tempered so her clay,
  That every hour thy heart runs wild,
  Yet never once doth go astray,

  Read o'er these lines; and then review                  5
  This tablet, that thus humbly rears
  In such diversity of hue
  Its history of two hundred years.

--When through this little wreck of fame,
  Cipher and syllable! thine eye                         10
  Has travelled down to Matthew's name,
  Pause with no common sympathy.

  And; if a sleeping tear should wake,
  Then be it neither checked nor stayed:
  For Matthew a request I make                           15
  Which for himself he had not made.

  Poor Matthew, all his frolics o'er,
  Is silent as a standing pool;
  Far from the chimney's merry roar,
  And murmur of the village school.                      20

  The sighs which Matthew heaved were sighs
  Of one tired out with fun and madness;
  The tears which came to Matthew's eyes
  Were tears of light, the dew [1] of gladness.

  Yet, sometimes, when the secret cup                    25
  Of still and serious thought went round,
  It seemed as if he drank it up--
  He felt with spirit so profound.

--Thou soul of God's best earthly mould!
  Thou happy Soul! and can it be                         30
  That these two words of glittering gold
  Are all that must remain of thee? [2]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  ... the oil ...      1800.]


[Variant 2:

1800.

  ... to thee?       1805, and MS.

The text of 1815 returns to that of 1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: On the 27th March 1843, Wordsworth wrote to Professor Henry
Reed of Philadelphia:

  "The character of the schoolmaster, had like the Wanderer in 'The
  Excursion' a solid foundation in fact and reality, but like him it was
  also in some degree a composition: I will not, and need not, call it
  an invention--it was no such thing."

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE TWO APRIL MORNINGS


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.




  We walked along, while bright and red
  Uprose the morning sun;
  And Matthew stopped, he looked, and said,
  "The will of God be done!"

  A village schoolmaster was he,                           5
  With hair of glittering grey;
  As blithe a man as you could see
  On a spring holiday.

  And on that morning, through the grass,
  And by the steaming rills,                              10
  We travelled merrily, to pass
  A day among the hills.

  "Our work," said I, "was well begun,
  Then, from thy breast what thought,
  Beneath so beautiful a sun,                             15
  So sad a sigh has brought?"

  A second time did Matthew stop;
  And fixing still his eye
  Upon the eastern mountain-top,
  To me he made reply:                                    20

  "Yon cloud with that long purple cleft
  Brings fresh into my mind
  A day like this which I have left
  Full thirty years behind.

  "And just above yon slope of corn                       25
  Such colours, and no other,
  Were in the sky, that April morn,
  Of this the very brother. [1]

  "With rod and line I sued the sport
  Which that sweet season gave, [2]                       30
  And, to the church-yard come, [3] stopped short
  Beside my daughter's grave.

  "Nine summers had she scarcely seen,
  The pride of all the vale;
  And then she sang [4];--she would have been             35
  A very nightingale.

  "Six feet in earth my Emma lay;
  And yet I loved her more,
  For so it seemed, than till that day
  I e'er had loved before.                                40

  "And, turning from her grave, I met,
  Beside the church-yard yew,
  A blooming Girl, whose hair was wet
  With points of morning dew.

  "A basket on her head she bare;                         45
  Her brow was smooth and white:
  To see a child so very fair,
  It was a pure delight!

  "No fountain from its rocky cave
  E'er tripped with foot so free;                         50
  She seemed as happy as a wave
  That dances on the sea. [A]

  "There came from me a sigh of pain
  Which I could ill confine;
  I looked at her, and looked again:                      55
  And did not wish her mine!"

  Matthew is in his grave, yet now,
  Methinks, I see him stand,
  As at that moment, with a bough [5]
  Of wilding in his hand.                                 60



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1802.

  And on that slope of springing corn
  The self-same crimson hue
  Fell from the sky that April morn,
  The same which now I view!          1800.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

  With rod and line my silent sport
  I plied by Derwent's wave,      1800.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  And, coming to the church, ...      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1800.

  ... sung;--...      1802.

The text of 1815 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 5:

1820.

  ... his bough       1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare the 'Winters Tale', act IV. scene iii. ll. 140-2:

        'when you do dance, I wish you
  A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do
  Nothing but that, etc.'

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE FOUNTAIN

A CONVERSATION


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.




  We talked with open heart, and tongue
  Affectionate and true,
  A pair of friends, though I was young,
  And Matthew seventy-two.

  We lay beneath a spreading oak,                        5
  Beside a mossy seat;
  And from the turf a fountain broke,
  And gurgled at our feet.

  "Now, Matthew!" said I, "let us match [1]
  This water's pleasant tune                            10
  With some old border-song, or catch
  That suits a summer's noon;

  "Or of the church-clock and the chimes
  Sing here beneath the shade,
  That half-mad thing of witty rhymes                   15
  Which you last April made!"

  In silence Matthew lay, and eyed
  The spring beneath the tree;
  And thus the dear old Man replied,
  The grey-haired man of glee:                          20

  "No check, no stay, this Streamlet fears; [2]
  How merrily it goes!
  'Twill murmur on a thousand years,
  And flow as now it flows.

  "And here, on this delightful day,                    25
  I cannot choose but think
  How oft, a vigorous man, I lay
  Beside this fountain's brink.

  "My eyes are dim with childish tears,
  My heart is idly stirred,                             30
  For the same sound is in my ears
  Which in those days I heard.

  "Thus fares it still in our decay:
  And yet the wiser mind
  Mourns less for what age takes away                   35
  Than what it leaves behind. [A]

  "The blackbird amid leafy trees,
  The lark above the hill, [3]
  Let loose their carols when they please,
  Are quiet when they will.                             40

  "With Nature never do _they_ wage
  A foolish strife; they see
  A happy youth, and their old age
  Is beautiful and free:

  "But we are pressed by heavy laws;                    45
  And often, glad no more,
  We wear a face of joy, because
  We have been glad of yore.

  "If there be [4] one who need bemoan
  His kindred laid in earth,                            50
  The household hearts that were his own;
  It is the man of mirth.

  "My days, my Friend, are almost gone,
  My life has been approved,
  And many love me; but by none                         55
  Am I enough beloved."

  "Now both himself and me he wrongs,
  The man who thus complains!
  I live and sing my idle songs
  Upon these happy plains;                              60

  "And, Matthew, for thy children dead
  I'll be a son to thee!"
  At this he grasped my hand, [5] and said,
  "Alas! that cannot be."

  We rose up from the fountain-side;                    65
  And down the smooth descent
  Of the green sheep-track did we glide;
  And through the wood we went;

  And, ere we came to Leonard's rock,
  He sang those witty rhymes                            70
  About the crazy old church-clock,
  And the bewildered chimes.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1820.

  Now, Matthew, let us try to match       1800.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  Down to the vale this water steers,      1800.

  Down to the vale with eager speed
  Behold this streamlet run,
  From subterranean bondage freed,
  And glittering in the sun.               C.

  From subterranean darkness freed,
  A pleasant course to run.                C.

  Down to the vale this streamlet hies,
  Look, how it seems to run,
  As if 't were pleased with summer skies,
  And glad to meet the sun.                C.

  And glad to greet the sun.               MS.

  No guide it needs, no check it fears,
  How merrily it goes!
  'Twill murmur on a thousand years,
  And flow as now it flows.                C.

  Down towards the vale with eager speed,
  Behold this streamlet run
  As if 'twere pleased with summer skies
  And glad to meet the sun.                C.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  The blackbird in the summer trees,
  The lark upon the hill,      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1832.

  ... is ....      1800 and MS.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  ... his hands, ...      1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A:

  "Pour me plaindre a moy, regarde noti tant ce qu'on moste, que ce qui
  me reste de sauvre, et dedans et dehors."

Montaigne, 'Essais', iii. 12.

Compare also:

  "Themistocles quidem, cum ei Simonides, an quis alius artem memoriae
  polliceretur, _Oblivionis_, inquit, _mallem_; _nam memini etiam quae
  nolo, oblivisci non possum quae volo_."

Cicero, 'De Finibus', II. 32.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TO A SEXTON


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


[Written in Germany, 1799.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  Let thy wheel-barrow alone--
  Wherefore, Sexton, piling still
  In thy bone-house bone on bone?
  'Tis already like a hill
  In a field of battle made,                              5
  Where three thousand skulls are laid;
  These died in peace each with the other,--
  Father, sister, friend, and brother.

  Mark the spot to which I point!
  From this platform, eight feet square,                 10
  Take not even a finger-joint:
  Andrew's whole fire-side is there.
  Here, alone, before thine eyes,
  Simon's sickly daughter lies,
  From weakness now, and pain defended,                  15
  Whom he twenty winters tended.

  Look but at the gardener's pride--
  How he glories, when he sees
  Roses, lilies, side by side,
  Violets in families!                                   20
  By the heart of Man, his tears,
  By his hopes and by his fears,
  Thou, too heedless, [1] art the Warden
  Of a far superior garden.

  Thus then, each to other dear,                         25
  Let them all in quiet lie,
  Andrew there, and Susan here,
  Neighbours in mortality.
  And, should I live through sun and rain
  Seven widowed years without my Jane,                   30
  O Sexton, do not then remove her,
  Let one grave hold the Loved and Lover!



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  Thou, old Grey-beard! ...    1800.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE DANISH BOY

A FRAGMENT


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


[Written in Germany, 1799. It was entirely a fancy; but intended as a
prelude to a ballad-poem never written.--I.F.]

In the editions of 1800-1832 this poem was called 'A Fragment'. From
1836 onwards it was named 'The Danish Boy. A Fragment'. It was one of
the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  I       Between two sister moorland rills
          There is a spot that seems to lie
          Sacred to flowerets of the hills,
          And sacred to the sky.
          And in this smooth and open dell                    5
          There is a tempest-stricken tree;
          A corner-stone by lightning cut,
          The last stone of a lonely hut; [1]
          And in this dell you see
          A thing no storm can e'er destroy,                 10
          The shadow of a Danish Boy. [A]


  II      In clouds above, the lark is heard,
          But drops not here to earth for rest; [2]
          Within [3] this lonesome nook the bird
          Did never build her [4] nest.                      15
          No beast, no bird hath here his home;
          Bees, wafted on [5] the breezy air,
          Pass high above those fragrant bells
          To other flowers:--to other dells
          Their burthens do they bear; [6]                   20
          The Danish Boy walks here alone:
          The lovely dell is all his own.

  III     A Spirit of noon-day is he;
          Yet seems [7] a form of flesh and blood;
          Nor piping shepherd shall he be,                   25
          Nor herd-boy of the wood. [8]
          A regal vest of fur he wears,
          In colour like a raven's wing;
          It fears not [9] rain, nor wind, nor dew;
          But in the storm 'tis fresh and blue               30
          As budding pines in spring;
          His helmet has a vernal grace,
          Fresh as the bloom upon his face.

  IV      A harp is from his shoulder slung;
          Resting the harp upon his knee;                    35
          To words of a forgotten tongue,
          He suits its melody. [10]
          Of flocks upon the neighbouring hill [11]
          He is the darling and the joy;
          And often, when no cause appears,                  40
          The mountain-ponies prick their ears,
--They hear the Danish Boy,
          While in the dell he sings [12] alone
          Beside the tree and corner-stone.
          [13]

  V       There sits he; in his face you spy                 45
          No trace of a ferocious air,
          Nor ever was a cloudless sky
          So steady or so fair.
          The lovely Danish Boy is blest
          And happy in his flowery cove:                     50
          From bloody deeds his thoughts are far;
          And yet he warbles songs of war,
          That seem [14] like songs of love,
          For calm and gentle is his mien;
          Like a dead Boy he is serene.                      55



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... a cottage hut;      1800.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  He sings his blithest and his best;      1800.

  She sings, regardless of her rest,       1820.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  But in ...      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1820.

  ... his ...     1800.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  The bees borne on ...     1800.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  Nor ever linger there.      1800.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

  He seems ...      1800.]


[Variant 8:

1802.

  A piping Shepherd he might be,
  A Herd-boy of the wood.      1800.]


[Variant 9:

1802.

  ... nor ...       1800.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  He rests the harp upon his knee,
  And there in a forgotten tongue
  He warbles melody.      1800.]


[Variant 11:

1827.

  Of flocks and herds both far and near      1800.

  Of flocks upon the neighbouring hills      1802.]


[Variant 12:

1845.

  ... sits ...     1800.]


[Variant 13:

  When near this blasted tree you pass,
  Two sods are plainly to be seen
  Close at its root, and each with grass
  Is cover'd fresh and green.
  Like turf upon a new-made grave
  These two green sods together lie,
  Nor heat, nor cold, nor rain, nor wind
  Can these two sods together bind,
  Nor sun, nor earth, nor sky,
  But side by side the two are laid,
  As if just sever'd by the spade.

This stanza occurs only in the edition of 1800.]


[Variant 14:

1815.

  They seem ...    1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: These Stanzas were designed to introduce a Ballad upon the
Story of a Danish Prince who had fled from Battle, and, for the sake of
the valuables about him, was murdered by the Inhabitant of a Cottage in
which he had taken refuge. The House fell under a curse, and the Spirit
of the Youth, it was believed, haunted the Valley where the crime had
been committed.--W. W. 1827.]





       *       *       *       *       *





LUCY GRAY; OR, SOLITUDE


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


[Written at Goslar, in Germany, in 1799. It was founded on a
circumstance told me by my sister, of a little girl, who, not far from
Halifax in Yorkshire, was bewildered in a snow storm. Her footsteps were
tracked by her parents to the middle of a lock of a canal, and no other
vestige of her, backward or forward, could be traced. The body, however,
was found in the canal. The way in which the incident was treated, and
the spiritualizing of the character, might furnish hints for contrasting
the imaginative influences, which I have endeavoured to throw over
common life, with Crabbe's matter-of-fact style of handling subjects of
the same kind. This is not spoken to his disparagement, far from it; but
to direct the attention of thoughtful readers into whose hands these
notes may fall, to a comparison that may enlarge the circle of their
sensibilities, and tend to produce in them a catholic judgment.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.




  Oft I had heard [1] of Lucy Gray:
  And, when I crossed the wild,
  I chanced to see at break of day
  The solitary child.

  No mate, no comrade Lucy knew;                       5
  She dwelt on a wide moor, [2]
--The sweetest thing that ever grew
  Beside a human door!

  You yet may spy the fawn at play,
  The hare upon the green;                            10
  But the sweet [3] face of Lucy Gray
  Will never more be seen.

  "To-night will be a stormy night--
  You to the town must go;
  And take a lantern, Child, to light                 15
  Your mother through the snow."

  "That, Father! will I gladly do:
  'Tis scarcely afternoon--
  The minster-clock has just struck two,
  And yonder is the moon!"                            20

  At this the Father raised his hook,
  And snapped [4] a faggot-band;
  He plied his work;--and Lucy took
  The lantern in her hand.

  Not blither is the mountain roe:                    25
  With many a wanton stroke
  Her feet disperse the powdery snow,
  That rises up like smoke.

  The storm came on before its time:
  She wandered up and down;                           30
  And many a hill did Lucy climb
  But never reached the town.

  The wretched parents all that night
  Went shouting far and wide;
  But there was neither sound nor sight               35
  To serve them for a guide.

  At day-break on a hill they stood
  That overlooked the moor;
  And thence they saw the bridge of wood,
  A furlong from their door.                          40

  They wept--and, turning homeward, cried, [5]
  "In heaven we all shall meet;"
--When in the snow the mother spied [6]
  The print of Lucy's feet.

  Then downwards [7] from the steep hill's edge       45
  They tracked the footmarks small;
  And through the broken hawthorn hedge,
  And by the long stone-wall;

  And then an open field they crossed:
  The marks were still the same;                      50
  They tracked them on, nor ever lost;
  And [8] to the bridge they came.

  They followed from the snowy bank
  Those [9] footmarks, one by one,
  Into the middle of the plank;                       55
  And further there were [10] none!

--Yet some maintain that to this day
  She is a living child;
  That you may see sweet Lucy Gray
  Upon the lonesome wild.                             60

  O'er rough and smooth she trips along,
  And never looks behind;
  And sings a solitary song
  That whistles in the wind. [A]




This poem was illustrated by Sir George Beaumont, in a picture of some
merit, which was engraved by J. C. Bromley, and published in the
collected editions of 1815 and 1820. Henry Crabb Robinson wrote in his
'Diary', September 11, 1816 (referring to Wordsworth):

  "He mentioned the origin of some poems. 'Lucy Gray', that tender and
  pathetic narrative of a child lost on a common, was occasioned by the
  death of a child who fell into the lock of a canal. His object was to
  exhibit poetically entire 'solitude', and he represents the child as
  observing the day-moon, which no town or village girl would ever
  notice."

A contributor to 'Notes and Queries', May 12, 1883, whose signature is
F., writes:

  "THE SCENE OF 'LUCY GRAY'.--In one of the editions of Wordsworth's
  works the scene of this ballad is said to have been near Halifax, in
  Yorkshire. I do not think the poet was acquainted with the locality
  beyond a sight of the country in travelling through on some journey. I
  know of no spot where all the little incidents mentioned in the poem
  would exactly fit in, and a few of the local allusions are evidently
  by a stranger. There is no 'minster'; the church at Halifax from time
  immemorial has always been known as the 'parish church,' and sometimes
  as the 'old church,' but has never been styled 'the minster.' The
  'mountain roe,' which of course may be brought in as poetically
  illustrative, has not been seen on these hills for generations, and I
  scarcely think even the 'fawn at play' for more than a hundred years.
  These misapplications, it is almost unnecessary to say, do not detract
  from the beauty of the poetry. Some of the touches are graphically
  true to the neighbourhood, as, for instance, 'the wide moor,' the
  'many a hill,' the 'steep hill's edge,' the 'long stone wall,' and the
  hint of the general loneliness of the region where Lucy 'no mate, no
  comrade, knew.' I think I can point out the exact spot--no longer a
  'plank,' but a broad, safe bridge--where Lucy fell into the water.
  Taking a common-sense view, that she would not be sent many miles at
  two o'clock on a winter afternoon to the town (Halifax, of course),
  over so lonely a mountain moor--bearing in mind also that this moor
  overlooked the river, and that the river was deep and strong enough to
  carry the child down the current--I know only one place where such an
  accident could have occurred. The clue is in this verse:

    'At day-break on a hill they stood
    That overlooked the moor;
    And thence they saw the bridge of wood,
    A furlong from their door.'

  The hill I take to be the high ridge of Greetland and Norland Moor,
  and the plank she had to cross Sterne Mill Bridge, which there spans
  the Calder, broad and rapid enough at any season to drown either a
  young girl or a grown-up person. The mountain burns, romantic and wild
  though they be, are not dangerous to cross, especially for a child old
  enough to go and seek her mother. To sum up the matter, the hill
  overlooking the moor, the path to and distance from the town, the
  bridge, the current, all indicate one point, and one point only, where
  this accident could have happened, and that is the bridge near Sterne
  Mill. This bridge is so designated from the Sterne family, a branch of
  whom in the last century resided close by. The author of 'Tristram
  Shandy' spent his boyhood here; and Lucy Gray, had she safely crossed
  the plank, would immediately have passed Wood Hall, where the boy
  Laurence had lived, and, pursuing her way to Halifax, would have gone
  through the meadows in which stood Heath School, where young Sterne
  had been educated. The mill-weir at Sterne Mill Bridge was, I believe,
  the scene of Lucy Gray's death."

Sterne Mill Bridge, however, crosses the river Calder, while Wordsworth
tells us that the girl lost her life by falling "into the lock of a
canal." The Calder runs parallel with the canal near Sterne Mill Bridge.
See J.R. Tutin's 'Wordsworth in Yorkshire'.--Ed.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1800.

  Oft had I heard ...

Only in the second issue of 1800.]


[Variant 2:

1800 (2nd issue).

  She dwelt on a wild Moor     1800.

  She lived on a wide Moor      MS.]


[Variant 3:

1800.

  ... bright ...      C.]


[Variant 4:

1800.

  He snapped ...      MS.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  And now they homeward turn'd, and cry'd    1800.

  And, turning homeward, now they cried      1815.]


[Variant 6:

1800.

  The Mother turning homeward cried,
  "We never more shall meet,"
  When in the driven snow she spied    MS.]


[Variant 7:

1840.

  Then downward ...      1800.

  Half breathless ...    1827.]


[Variant 8:

1800.

  ... and never lost
  Till ...    MS.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

  The ...      1800.]


[Variant 10:

1800.

  ... was ...      1802.

The text of 1815 returns to that of 1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Gray's ode, 'On a Distant Prospect of Eton
College', II. 38-9:

  'Still as they run they look behind,
  They hear a voice in every wind.'

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





RUTH


Composed 1799.--Published 1800


[Written in Germany, 1799. Suggested by an account I had of a wanderer
in Somersetshire.--I.F.]

Classed among the "Poems founded on the Affections" in the editions of
1815 and 1820. In 1827 it was transferred to the "Poems of the
Imagination."--Ed.




  When Ruth was left half desolate,
  Her Father took another Mate;
  And Ruth, not seven years old,
  A slighted child, at her own will [1]
  Went wandering over dale and hill,                     5
  In thoughtless freedom, bold.

  And she had made a pipe of straw,
  And music from that pipe could draw
  Like sounds of winds and floods; [2]
  Had built a bower upon the green,                     10
  As if she from her birth had been
  An infant of the woods.

  Beneath her father's roof, alone [3]
  She seemed to live; her thoughts her own;
  Herself her own delight;                              15
  Pleased with herself, nor sad, nor gay;
  And, passing thus the live-long day,
  She grew to woman's height. [4]

  There came a Youth from Georgia's shore--
  A military casque he wore,                            20
  With splendid feathers drest; [A]
  He brought them from the Cherokees;
  The feathers nodded in the breeze,
  And made a gallant crest.

  From Indian blood you deem him sprung:                25
  But no! [5] he spake the English tongue,
  And bore [6] a soldier's name;
  And, when America was free
  From battle and from jeopardy,
  He 'cross the ocean came.                             30

  With hues of genius on his cheek
  In finest tones the Youth could speak:
--While he was yet a boy,
  The moon, the glory of the sun,
  And streams that murmur as they run,                  35
  Had been his dearest joy.

  He was a lovely Youth! I guess
  The panther in the wilderness
  Was not so fair as he;
  And, when he chose to sport and play,                 40
  No dolphin ever was so gay
  Upon the tropic sea.

  Among the Indians he had fought,
  And with him many tales he brought
  Of pleasure and of fear;                              45
  Such tales as told to any maid
  By such a Youth, in the green shade,
  Were perilous to hear.

  He told of girls--a happy rout!
  Who quit their fold with dance and shout,             50
  Their pleasant Indian town,
  To gather strawberries all day long;
  Returning with a choral song
  When daylight is gone down.

  He spake of plants that hourly change                 55
  Their blossoms, through a boundless range
  Of intermingling hues; [7] [B]
  With budding, fading, faded flowers
  They stand the wonder of the bowers
  From morn to evening dews, [C]                        60
  [8]
  He told of the magnolia, [D] spread
  High as a cloud, high over head!
  The cypress and her spire; [E]
--Of flowers [F] that with one scarlet gleam
  Cover a hundred leagues, and seem                     65
  To set the hills on fire. [G]

  The Youth of green savannahs spake,
  And many an endless, endless lake,
  With all its fairy crowds
  Of islands, that together lie                         70
  As quietly as spots of sky
  Among the evening clouds. [H]

  "How pleasant," then he said, "it were [9]
  A fisher or a hunter there,
  In sunshine or in shade                               75
  To wander with an easy mind;
  And build a household fire, and find [10]
  A home in every glade!

  "What days and what bright [11] years! Ah me!
  Our life were life indeed, with thee                  80
  So passed in quiet bliss,
  And all the while," said he, "to know
  That we were in a world of woe,
  On such an earth as this!"

  And then he sometimes interwove                       85
  Fond [12] thoughts about a father's love:
  "For there," said he, "are spun
  Around the heart such tender ties,
  That our own children to our eyes
  Are dearer than the sun.                              90

  "Sweet Ruth! and could you go with me
  My helpmate in the woods to be,
  Our shed at night to rear;
  Or run, my own adopted bride,
  A sylvan huntress at my side,                         95
  And drive the flying deer!

  "Beloved Ruth!"--No more he said.
  The wakeful Ruth at midnight shed [13]
  A solitary tear:
  She thought again--and did agree                     100
  With him to sail across the sea,
  And drive the flying deer.

  "And now, as fitting is and right,
  We in the church our faith will plight,
  A husband and a wife."                               105
  Even so they did; and I may say
  That to sweet Ruth that happy day
  Was more than human life.

  Through dream and vision did she sink,
  Delighted all the while to think                     110
  That on those lonesome floods,
  And green savannahs, she should share
  His board with lawful joy, and bear
  His name in the wild woods.

  But, as you have before been told,                   115
  This Stripling, sportive, gay, and bold,
  And, with his dancing crest,
  So beautiful, through savage lands
  Had roamed about, with vagrant bands
  Of Indians in the West.                              120

  The wind, the tempest roaring high,
  The tumult of a tropic sky,
  Might well be dangerous food
  For him, a Youth to whom was given
  So much of earth--so much of heaven,                 125
  And such impetuous blood.

  Whatever in those climes he found
  Irregular in sight or sound
  Did to his mind impart
  A kindred impulse, seemed allied                     130
  To his own powers, and justified
  The workings of his heart.

  Nor less, to feed voluptuous [14] thought,
  The beauteous forms of nature wrought,
  Fair trees and gorgeous [15] flowers;                135
  The breezes their own languor lent;
  The stars had feelings, which they sent
  Into those favored [16] bowers.

  Yet, in his worst pursuits, I ween
  That sometimes [17] there did intervene              140
  Pure hopes of high intent:
  For passions linked to forms so fair
  And stately, needs must have their share [18]
  Of noble sentiment.

  But ill he lived, [19] much evil saw,                145
  With men to whom no better law
  Nor better life was known;
  Deliberately, and undeceived,
  Those wild men's vices he received,
  And gave them back his own.                          150

  His genius and his moral frame
  Were thus impaired, and he became
  The slave of low desires:
  A Man who without self-control
  Would seek what the degraded soul                    155
  Unworthily admires.

  And yet he with no feigned delight
  Had wooed the Maiden, day and night
  Had loved her, night and morn:
  What could he less than love a Maid                  160
  Whose heart with so much nature played
  So kind and so forlorn!

  Sometimes, most earnestly, he said,
  "O Ruth! I have been worse than dead;
  False thoughts, thoughts bold and vain,              165
  Encompassed me on every side
  When I, in confidence and pride,
  Had crossed the Atlantic main. [20]

  "Before me shone a glorious world--
  Fresh as a banner bright, unfurled                   170
  To music suddenly: [21]
  I looked upon those hills and plains,
  And seemed as if let loose from chains,
  To live at liberty.
  [22]
  "No more of this; for now, by thee,                  175
  Dear Ruth! more happily set free
  With nobler zeal I burn; [23]
  My soul from darkness is released,
  Like the whole sky when to the east [24]
  The morning doth return."                            180
  [25]
  Full soon that better mind was gone; [26]
  No hope, no wish remained, not one,--
  They stirred him now no more;
  New objects did new pleasure give,
  And once again he wished to live                     185
  As lawless as before.

  Meanwhile, as thus with him it fared,
  They for the voyage were prepared,
  And went to the sea-shore,
  But, when they thither came, the Youth               190
  Deserted his poor Bride, and Ruth
  Could never find him more.

  God help thee, Ruth!-Such pains she had,
  That she in half a year was mad,
  And in a prison housed;                              195
  And there, with many a doleful song
  Made of wild words, her cup of wrong
  She fearfully caroused. [27]

  Yet sometimes milder hours she knew,
  Nor wanted sun, nor rain, nor dew,                   200
  Nor pastimes of the May;
--They all were with her in her cell;
  And a clear brook  [28] with cheerful knell
  Did o'er the pebbles play.

  When Ruth three seasons thus had lain,               205
  There came a respite to her pain;
  She from her prison fled;
  But of the Vagrant none took thought;
  And where it liked her best she sought
  Her shelter and her bread.                           210

  Among the fields she breathed again:
  The master-current of her brain
  Ran permanent and free;
  And, coming to the Banks of Tone, [I]
  There did she rest; and dwell alone [29]             215
  Under the greenwood tree.

  The engines of her pain, [30] the tools
  That shaped her sorrow, rocks and pools,
  And airs that gently stir
  The vernal leaves--she loved them still;             220
  Nor ever taxed them with the ill
  Which had been done to her.

  A Barn her _winter_ bed supplies;
  But, till the warmth of summer skies
  And summer days is gone,                             225
  (And all do in this tale agree) [31]
  She sleeps beneath the greenwood tree,
  And other home hath none.

  An innocent life, yet far astray!
  And Ruth will, long before her day, [32]             230
  Be broken down and old:
  Sore aches she needs must have! but less
  Of mind, than body's wretchedness,
  From damp, and rain, and cold. [33]

  If she is prest by want of food,                     235
  She from her dwelling in the wood
  Repairs to a road-side;
  And there she begs at one steep place
  Where up and down with easy pace
  The horsemen-travellers ride.                        240

  That oaten pipe of hers is mute,
  Or thrown away; but with a flute
  Her loneliness she cheers:
  This flute, made of a hemlock stalk,
  At evening in his homeward walk                      245
  The Quantock woodman hears.

  I, too, have passed her on the hills
  Setting her little water-mills
  By spouts and fountains wild--
  Such small machinery as she turned                   250
  Ere she had wept, ere she had mourned,
  A young and happy Child!

  Farewell! and when thy days are told,
  Ill-fated Ruth, in hallowed mould
  Thy corpse shall buried be,                          255
  For thee a funeral bell shall ring,
  And all the congregation sing
  A Christian psalm for thee.




The following extract from Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal gives the date
of the stanzas added to 'Ruth' in subsequent editions:

  "Sunday, March 8th, 1802.--I stitched up 'The Pedlar,' wrote out
  'Ruth', read it with the alterations.... William brought two new
  stanzas of 'Ruth'."

The transpositions of stanzas, and their omission from certain editions
and their subsequent re-introduction, in altered form, in later ones,
make it extremely difficult to give the textual history of 'Ruth' in
footnotes. They are even more bewildering than the changes introduced
into 'Simon Lee'.--Ed.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1802.

  And so, not seven years old,
  The slighted Child ...      1800.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  And from that oaten pipe could draw
  All sounds ...      1800.]


[Variant 3: This stanza was added in the edition of 1802.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  She pass'd her time; and in this way
  Grew up to Woman's height.       1802.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

  Ah no! ...        1800.]


[Variant 6:

1805.

  ... bare ...        1800.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

  He spake of plants divine and strange
  That ev'ry day their blossoms change,
  Ten thousand lovely hues!       1800.

  ... every hour ...              1802.]


[Variant 8:

  Of march and ambush, siege and fight,
  Then did he tell; and with delight
  The heart of Ruth would ache;
  Wild histories they were, and dear:
  But 'twas a thing of heaven to hear
  When of himself he spake!

Only in the editions of 1802 and 1805.

The following is the order of the stanzas in the edition of 1802.
The first, fifth, and last had not appeared before.

  Sometimes most earnestly he said;
  "O Ruth! I have been worse than dead:
  False thoughts, thoughts bold and vain
  Encompass'd me on every side
  When I, in thoughtlessness and pride,
  Had cross'd the Atlantic Main.

  Whatever in those Climes I found
  Irregular in sight or sound
  Did to my mind impart
  A kindred impulse, seem'd allied
  To my own powers, and justified
  The workings of my heart.

  Nor less to feed unhallow'd thought
  The beauteous forms of nature wrought,
  Fair trees and lovely flowers;
  The breezes their own languor lent;
  The stars had feelings which they sent
  Into those magic bowers.

  Yet, in my worst pursuits, I ween,
  That often there did intervene
  Pure hopes of high intent;
  My passions, amid forms so fair
  And stately, wanted not their share
  Of noble sentiment.

  So was it then, and so is now:
  For, Ruth! with thee I know not how
  I feel my spirit burn
  Even as the east when day comes forth;
  And to the west, and south, and north,
  The morning doth return.

  It is a purer better mind:
  O Maiden innocent and kind
  What sights I might have seen!
  Even now upon my eyes they break!"
--And he again began to speak
  Of Lands where he had been.

The last stanza is only in the editions of 1802-1805. [a]]


[Variant 9:

1836.

  And then he said "How sweet it were       1800.]


[Variant 10:

1845.

  A gardener in the shade,
  Still wandering with an easy mind
  To build ...    1800.

  In sunshine or through shade
  To wander with an easy mind;
  And build ...    1836.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

  ... sweet ...    1800.]


[Variant 12:

1832.

  Dear ...    1800.]


[Variant 13:

1820.

  Sweet Ruth alone at midnight shed    1800.]


[Variant 14:

1800.

  ... unhallow'd ...    1802 and MS.

The edition of 1805 returns to the reading of 1800.]


[Variant 15:

1845.

  ... lovely ...    1800.]


[Variant 16:

1845.

  ... magic ...    1800.

  ... gorgeous ...    1815.]


[Variant 17:

1800.

  That often ...    1802.

The text of 1805 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 18:

1800.

  For passions, amid forms so fair
  And stately, wanted not their share     1802.

The text of 1805 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 19:

1800.

  Ill did he live ...    1802.

The text of 1805 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 20:

1805.

  When I, in thoughtlessness and pride,
  Had crossed ...    1802.

  When first, in confidence and pride,
  I crossed ...      1820.

C., and the edition of 1840, revert to the reading of 1805.]


[Variant 21:

1840 and C.

  "It was a fresh and glorious world,
  A banner bright that was unfurled
  Before me suddenly:                    1805.

  A banner bright that shone unfurled    1836.]


[Variant 22: Lines 163-168, and 175-180, were added in 1802. Lines
169-174 were added in 1805. All these were omitted in 1815, but were
restored in 1820.]


[Variant 23:

1845

  So was it then, and so is now:
  For, Ruth! with thee I know not how
  I feel my spirit burn         1802.

  "But wherefore speak of this? for now,
  Sweet Ruth! with thee, ...    1805.

  Dear Ruth! with thee ...      1836.]


[Variant 24:

1836.

  Even as the east when day comes forth;
  And to the west, and south, and north,    1802.]


[Variant 25:

  It is my purer better mind
  O maiden innocently kind
  What sights I might have seen!
  Even now upon my eyes they break!
  And then the youth began to speak
  Of lands where he had been.    MS.]


[Variant 26:

1845.

  But now the pleasant dream was gone,    1800.

  Full soon that purer mind ...    1820.]


[Variant 27:

1836.

  And there, exulting in her wrongs,
  Among the music of her songs
  She fearfully carouz'd. [b]    1800.

  And there she sang tumultuous songs,
  By recollection of her wrongs,
  To fearful passion rouzed.      1820.]


[Variant 28:

1836.

  wild brook ...    1800.]


[Variant 29:

1802.

  And to the pleasant Banks of Tone
  She took her way, to dwell alone    1800.]


[Variant 30:

1802.

  ... grief, ...    1800.]


[Variant 31:

1805.

  (And in this tale we all agree)    1800.]


[Variant 32:

1805.

  The neighbours grieve for her, and say
  That she will ...    1802.]


[Variant 33: This stanza first appeared in the edition of 1802.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Taken from the portrait of the chief in Bartram's
frontispiece.--Ed.]


[Footnote B:

  "The tall aspiring Gordonia lacianthus ... gradually changing colour,
  from green to golden yellow, from that to a scarlet, from scarlet to
  crimson, and lastly to a brownish purple, ... so that it may be said
  to change and renew its garments every morning throughout the year."

See 'Travels through North and South Carolina, Georgia, East Florida,
the Cherokee Country', etc., by William Bartram (1791), pp. 159,
160.--Ed.]


[Footnote C:

  "Its thick foliage of a dark green colour is flowered over with large
  milk-white, fragrant blossoms, ... renewed every morning, and that in
  such incredible profusion that the tree appears silvered over with
  them, and the ground beneath covered with the fallen flowers. It, at
  the same time, continually pushes forth new twigs, with young buds on
  them."

(Bartram's 'Travels', etc., p. 159.)--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Magnolia grandiflora.--W. W. 1800; and Bartram's 'Travels',
p. 8.--Ed.]


[Footnote E:

  "The Cypressus distichia stands in the first order of North American
  trees. Its majestic stature, lifting its cumbrous top towards the
  skies, and casting a wide shade upon the ground, as a dark intervening
  cloud," etc.

(Bartram's 'Travels', p. 88).--Ed.]


[Footnote F: The splendid appearance of these scarlet flowers, which are
scattered with such profusion over the Hills in the Southern parts of
North America is frequently mentioned by Bartram in his 'Travels'.--W.
W. 1800.]


[Footnote G: Mr. Ernest Coleridge tells me he

  "has traced, to a note-book of Coleridge's in the British Museum, the
  source from which Wordsworth derived his description of Georgian
  scenery in 'Ruth'.  He does, I know, refer to Bartram, but the whole
  passage is a poetical rendering, and a pretty close one, of Bartram's
  poetical narrative.  I have a portrait--the frontispiece of Bartram's
  'Travels'--of Mico Chlucco, king of the Seminoles, whose feathers nod
  in the breeze just as did the military casque of the 'youth from
  Georgia's shore.'"

Ed.]


[Footnote H:

  "North and south almost endless green plains and meadows, embellished
  with islets and projecting promontories of high dark forests, where
  the pyramidal Magnolia grandiflora ... conspicuously towers."

(Bartram's 'Travels', p. 145).--Ed.]


[Footnote I: The Tone is a River of Somersetshire, at no great distance
from the Quantock Hills. These Hills, which are alluded to a few stanzas
below, are extremely beautiful, and in most places richly covered with
Coppice woods. W. W. 1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: The edition of 1805 substitutes the stanzas beginning,

  'It was a fresh and glorious world'

for stanzas 2, 3, and 4 of the above six in this note, but it inserts
these omitted stanzas later on as Nos. 27, 28, 29.--Ed.]


[Sub-Footnote b: Wordsworth wrote to Barren Field in 1828 that this stanza

  "was altered, Lamb having observed that it was not English. I like it
  better myself;'

(i.e. the version of 1800)

  "but certainly to carouse cups--that is to empty them--is the genuine
  English."

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





1800


Towards the close of December 1799, Wordsworth came to live at Dove
Cottage, Town-end, Grasmere. The poems written during the following year
(1800), are more particularly associated with that district of the
Lakes. Two of them were fragments of a canto of 'The Recluse', entitled
"Home at Grasmere," referring to his settlement at Dove Cottage. Others,
such as 'Michael', and 'The Brothers'--classed by him afterwards among
the "Poems founded on the Affections,"--deal with incidents in the rural
life of the dalesmen of Westmoreland and Cumberland. Most of the "Poems
on the Naming of Places" were written during this year; and the "Places"
are all in the neighbourhood of Grasmere. To these were added several
"Pastoral Poems"--such as 'The Idle Shepherd Boys; or, Dungeon-Ghyll
Force'--sundry "Poems of the Fancy," and one or two "Inscriptions." In
all, twenty-five poems were written in the year 1800; and, with the
exception of the two fragments of 'The Recluse', they were published
during the same year in the second volume of the second edition of
"Lyrical Ballads." It is impossible to fix the precise date of the
composition of the fragments of 'The Recluse'; but, as they refer to the
settlement at Dove Cottage--where Wordsworth went to reside with his
sister, on the 21st of December 1799--they may fitly introduce the poems
belonging to the year 1800. They were first published in 1851 in the
'Memoirs of Wordsworth' (vol. i. pp. 157 and 155 respectively), by the
poet's nephew, the late Bishop of Lincoln. The entire canto of 'The
Recluse', entitled "Home at Grasmere," will be included in this edition.

The first two poems which follow, as belonging to the year 1800, are
parts of 'The Recluse', viz. "On Nature's invitation do I come," (which
is ll. 71-97, and 110-125), and "Bleak season was it, turbulent and
bleak," (which is ll. 152-167). They are not reprinted from the
'Memoirs' of 1851, because the text there given was, in several
instances, inaccurately reproduced from the original MS., which has been
re-examined. They were printed here, in 'The Recluse '(1888), and in my
'Life of Wordsworth' (vol. i. 1889).--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"ON NATURE'S INVITATION DO I COME"


Composed (probably) in 1800.--Published 1851




  On Nature's invitation do I come,
  By Reason sanctioned. Can the choice mislead,
  That made the calmest, fairest spot of earth,
  With all its unappropriated good,
  My own, and not mine only, for with me                          5
  Entrenched--say rather peacefully embowered--
  Under yon orchard, in yon humble cot,
  A younger orphan of a home extinct,
  The only daughter of my parents dwells:
  Aye, think on that, my heart, and cease to stir;               10
  Pause upon that, and let the breathing frame
  No longer breathe, but all be satisfied.
  Oh, if such silence be not thanks to God
  For what hath been bestowed, then where, where then
  Shall gratitude find rest? Mine eyes did ne'er                 15
  Fix on a lovely object, nor my mind
  Take pleasure in the midst of happy thoughts,
  But either she, whom now I have, who now
  Divides with me this loved abode, was there,
  Or not far off. Where'er my footsteps turned,                  20
  Her voice was like a hidden bird that sang;
  The thought of her was like a flash of light
  Or an unseen companionship, a breath
  Or fragrance independent of the wind.
  In all my goings, in the new and old                           25
  Of all my meditations, and in this
  Favourite of all, in this the most of all....
  Embrace me then, ye hills, and close me in.
  Now in the clear and open day I feel
  Your guardianship: I take it to my heart;                      30
  'Tis like the solemn shelter of the night.
  But I would call thee beautiful; for mild,
  And soft, and gay, and beautiful thou art,
  Dear valley, having in thy face a smile,
  Though peaceful, full of gladness. Thou art pleased,           35
  Pleased with thy crags, and woody steeps, thy lake,
  Its one green island, and its winding shores,
  The multitude of little rocky hills,
  Thy church, and cottages of mountain-stone
  Clustered like stars some few, but single most,                40
  And lurking dimly in their shy retreats,
  Or glancing at each other cheerful looks,
  Like separated stars with clouds between.




This Grasmere cottage is identified, much more than Rydal Mount, with
Wordsworth's "poetic prime." It had once been a public-house, bearing
the sign of the Dove and Olive Bough--and as such is referred to in 'The
Waggoner'--from which circumstance it was for a long time, and is now
usually, called "Dove Cottage." A small two storied house, it is
described somewhat minutely--as it was in Wordsworth's time--by De
Quincey, in his 'Recollections of the Lakes', and by the late Bishop of
Lincoln, in the 'Memoirs' of his uncle.

  "The front of it faces the lake; behind is a small plot of orchard and
  garden ground, in which there is a spring and rocks; the enclosure
  shelves upwards towards the woody sides of the mountains above it."
  [A]

The following is De Quincey's description of it, as he saw it in the
summer of 1807.

  "A white cottage, with two yew trees breaking the glare of its white
  walls" (these yews still stand on the eastern side of the cottage). "A
  little semi-vestibule between two doors prefaced the entrance into
  what might be considered the principal room of the cottage. It was an
  oblong square, not above eight and a half feet high, sixteen feet
  long, and twelve broad; wainscoted from floor to ceiling with dark
  polished oak, slightly embellished with carving. One window there
  was--a perfect and unpretending cottage window, with little diamond
  panes, embowered at almost every season of the year with roses; and,
  in the summer and autumn, with a profusion of jasmine, and other
  fragrant shrubs.... I was ushered up a little flight of stairs,
  fourteen in all, to a little drawing-room, or whatever the reader
  chooses to call it. Wordsworth himself has described the fireplace of
  this room as his

    'Half-kitchen and half-parlour fire.'

  It was not fully seven feet six inches high, and in other respects
  pretty nearly of the same dimensions as the rustic hall below. There
  was, however, in a small recess, a library of perhaps three hundred
  volumes, which seemed to consecrate the room as the poet's study and
  composing room, and such occasionally it was. But far oftener he both
  studied, as I found, and composed on the high road." [B]

Other poems of later years refer, much more fully than the above, to
this cottage, and its orchard ground, where so many of Wordsworth's
lyrics were composed.

The "orchard ground," which was for the most part in grass, sloped
upwards; but a considerable portion of the natural rock was exposed; and
on its face, some rough stone steps were cut by Wordsworth, helped by a
near neighbour of his--John Fisher--so as more conveniently to reach the
upper terrace, where the poet built for himself a small arbour. All this
garden and orchard ground is not much altered since 1800. The short
terrace walk is curved, with a sloping bank of grass above, shaded by
apple trees, hazel, holly, laburnum, laurel, and mountain ash. Below the
terrace is the well, which supplied the cottage in Wordsworth's time;
and there large leaved primroses still grow, doubtless the successors of
those planted by his own and his sister's hands. Above, and amongst the
rocks, are the daffodils, which they also brought to their
"garden-ground;" the Christmas roses, which they planted near the well,
were removed to the eastern side of the garden, where they flourished
luxuriantly in 1882; but have now, alas! disappeared. The box-wood
planted by the poet grows close to the cottage. The arbour is now gone;
but, in the place where it stood, a seat is erected. The hidden brook
still sings its under-song, as it used to do, "its quiet soul on all
bestowing," and the green linnet may doubtless be seen now, as it used
to be in 1803. The allusions to the garden ground at Dove Cottage, in
the poems which follow, will be noted as they occur.--Ed.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: See the 'Memoirs of Wordsworth', vol. i. p. 156.--Ed.]

[Footnote B: See 'Recollections of the Lakes', etc., pp. 130-137, Works,
vol. ii., edition of 1862.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"BLEAK SEASON WAS IT, TURBULENT AND BLEAK" [A]


Composed (probably) in 1800.--Published 1851




  Bleak season was it, turbulent and bleak,
  When hitherward we journeyed, side by side,
  Through burst of sunshine and through flying showers,
  Paced the long vales, how long they were, and yet
  How fast that length of way was left behind,                   5
  Wensley's rich vale and Sedbergh's naked heights.
  The frosty wind, as if to make amends
  For its keen breath, was aiding to our steps,
  And drove us onward like two ships at sea;
  Or, like two birds, companions in mid-air,                    10
  Parted and reunited by the blast.
  Stern was the face of nature; we rejoiced
  In that stern countenance; for our souls thence drew
  A feeling of their strength. The naked trees,
  The icy brooks, as on we passed, appeared                     15
  To question us, "Whence come ye? To what end?"




This poem refers to a winter journey on foot, which Wordsworth and his
sister took from Sockburn to Grasmere, by Wensleydale and Askrigg; and,
since he has left us an account of this journey, in a letter to
Coleridge, written a few days after their arrival at Grasmere--a letter
in which his characterisation of Nature is almost as happy as it is in
his best poems--some extracts from it may here be appended.

  "We left Sockburn last Tuesday morning. We crossed the Tees by
  moonlight in the Sockburn fields, and after ten good miles riding came
  in sight of the Swale. It is there a beautiful river, with its green
  banks and flat holms scattered over with trees. Four miles further
  brought us to Richmond, with its huge ivied castle, its friarage
  steeple, its castle tower resembling a huge steeple.... We were now in
  Wensleydale, and D. and I set off side by side to foot it as far as
  Kendal.... We reached Askrigg, twelve miles, before six in the
  evening, having been obliged to walk the last two miles over hard
  frozen roads.... Next morning the earth was thinly covered with snow,
  enough to make the road soft and prevent its being slippery. On
  leaving Askrigg we turned aside to see another waterfall. It was a
  beautiful morning, with driving snow showers, which disappeared by
  fits, and unveiled the east, which was all one delicious pale orange
  colour. After walking through two small fields we came to a mill,
  which we passed, and in a moment a sweet little valley opened before
  us, with an area of grassy ground, and a stream dashing over various
  laminae of black rocks close under a bank covered with firs; the bank
  and stream on our left, another woody bank on our right, and the flat
  meadow in front, from which, as at Buttermere, the stream had retired,
  as it were, to hide itself under the shade. As we walked up this
  delightful valley we were tempted to look back perpetually on the
  stream, which reflected the orange lights of the morning among the
  gloomy rocks, with a brightness varying with the agitation of the
  current. The steeple of Askrigg was between us and the east, at the
  bottom of the valley; it was not a quarter of a mile distant.... The
  two banks seemed to join before us with a facing of rock common to
  them both. When we reached this bottom the valley opened out again;
  two rocky banks on each side, which, hung with ivy and moss, and
  fringed luxuriantly with brushwood, ran directly parallel to each
  other, and then approaching with a gentle curve at their point of
  union, presented a lofty waterfall, the termination of the valley. It
  was a keen frosty morning, showers of snow threatening us, but the sun
  bright and active. We had a task of twenty-one miles to perform in a
  short winter's day.... On a nearer approach the waters seemed to fall
  down a tall arch or niche that had shaped itself by insensible
  moulderings in the wall of an old castle. We left this spot with
  reluctance, but highly exhilarated.... It was bitter cold, the wind
  driving the snow behind us in the best style of a mountain storm. We
  soon reached an inn at a place called Hardrane, and descending from
  our vehicles, after warming ourselves by the cottage fire, we walked
  up the brook-side to take a view of a third waterfall. We had not
  walked above a few hundred yards between two winding rocky banks
  before we came full upon the waterfall, which seemed to throw itself
  in a narrow line from a lofty wall of rock, the water, which shot
  manifestly to some distance from the rock, seeming to be dispersed
  into a thin shower scarcely visible before it reached the bason. We
  were disappointed in the cascade itself, though the introductory and
  accompanying banks were an exquisite mixture of grandeur and
  beauty.... After cautiously sounding our way over stones of all
  colours and sizes, encased in the clearest water formed by the spray
  of the fall, we found the rock, which before had appeared like a wall,
  extending itself over our heads, like the ceiling of a huge cave, from
  the summit of which the waters shot directly over our heads into a
  bason, and among fragments wrinkled over with masses of ice as white
  as snow, or rather, as Dorothy says, like congealed froth. The water
  fell at least ten yards from us, and we stood directly behind it, the
  excavation not so deep in the rock as to impress any feeling of
  darkness, but lofty and magnificent; but in connection with the
  adjoining banks excluding as much of the sky as could well be spared
  from a scene so exquisitely beautiful. The spot where we stood was as
  dry as the chamber in which I am now sitting, and the incumbent rock,
  of which the groundwork was limestone, veined and dappled with colours
  which melted into each other with every possible variety of colour. On
  the summit of the cave were three festoons, or rather wrinkles, in the
  rock, run up parallel like the folds of a curtain when it is drawn up.
  Each of these was hung with icicles of various length, and nearly in
  the middle of the festoon, in the deepest valley of the waves that ran
  parallel to each other, the stream shot from the rows of icicles in
  irregular fits of strength, and with a body of water that varied every
  moment. Sometimes the stream shot into the bason in one continued
  current; sometimes it was interrupted almost in the midst of its fall,
  and was blown towards part of the waterfall at no great distance from
  our feet like the heaviest thunder shower. In such a situation you
  have at every moment a feeling of the presence of the sky. Large
  fleecy clouds drove over our heads above the rush of the water, and
  the sky appeared of a blue more than usually brilliant. The rocks on
  each side, which, joining with the side of this cave, formed the vista
  of the brook, were chequered with three diminutive waterfalls, or
  rather courses of water. Each of these was a miniature of all that
  summer and winter can produce of delicate beauty. The rock in the
  centre of the falls, where the water was most abundant, a deep black,
  the adjoining parts yellow, white, purple, and dove colour, covered
  with water--plants of the most vivid green, and hung with streaming
  icicles, that in some places seem to conceal the verdure of the plants
  and the violet and yellow variegation of the rocks; and in some places
  render the colours more brilliant. I cannot express to you the
  enchanting effect produced by this Arabian scene of colour as the wind
  blew aside the great waterfall behind which we stood, and alternately
  hid and revealed each of these fairy cataracts in irregular
  succession, or displayed them with various gradations of distinctness
  as the intervening spray was thickened or dispersed. What a scene too
  in summer! In the luxury of our imagination we could not help feeding
  upon the pleasure which this cave, in the heat of a July noon, would
  spread through a frame exquisitely sensible. That huge rock on the
  right, the bank winding round on the left with all its living foliage,
  and the breeze stealing up the valley, and bedewing the cavern with
  the freshest imaginable spray. And then the murmur of the water, the
  quiet, the seclusion, and a long summer day."

Ed.


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT:

[Footnote A: This is a fragment of 'The Recluse', ll. 152-167; but it
was originally published in the 'Memoirs of Wordsworth' by his nephew
(1851).--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





ELLEN IRWIN; OR, THE BRAES OF KIRTLE [A]


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[It may be worth while to observe that as there are Scotch Poems on this
subject in simple ballad strain, I thought it would be both presumptuous
and superfluous to attempt treating it in the same way; and,
accordingly, I chose a construction of stanza quite new in our language;
in fact, the same as that of Burger's 'Leonora', except that the first
and third lines do not, in my stanzas, rhyme. At the outset I threw out
a classical image to prepare the reader for the style in which I meant
to treat the story, and so to preclude all comparison.--I.F.]

In the editions of 1815 and 1820 this was included among the "Poems
founded on the Affections." In 1827 it was placed in the "Memorials of a
Tour in Scotland, 1803."--Ed.




  Fair Ellen Irwin, when she sate
  Upon the braes of Kirtle,
  Was lovely as a Grecian maid
  Adorned with wreaths of myrtle;
  Young Adam Bruce beside her lay,                      5
  And there did they beguile the day
  With love and gentle speeches,
  Beneath the budding beeches.

  From many knights and many squires
  The Bruce had been selected;                         10
  And Gordon, fairest of them all,
  By Ellen was rejected.
  Sad tidings to that noble Youth!
  For it may be proclaimed with truth,
  If Bruce hath loved sincerely,                       15
  That Gordon [1] loves as dearly.

  But what are Gordon's form and face,
  His shattered hopes and crosses,
  To them, 'mid Kirtle's pleasant braes,
  Reclined on flowers and mosses? [2]                  20
  Alas that ever he was born!
  The Gordon, couched behind a thorn,
  Sees them and their caressing;
  Beholds them blest and blessing.

  Proud Gordon, maddened by the thoughts [3]           25
  That through his brain are travelling,
  Rushed forth, and at the heart of Bruce [4]
  He launched a deadly javelin!
  Fair Ellen saw it as it came,
  And, starting up to meet the same, [5]               30
  Did with her body cover
  The Youth, her chosen lover.

  And, falling into Bruce's arms,
  Thus died the beauteous Ellen,
  Thus, from the heart of her True-love,               35
  The mortal spear repelling.
  And Bruce, as soon as he had slain
  The Gordon, sailed away to Spain;
  And fought with rage incessant
  Against the Moorish crescent.                        40

  But many days, and many months,
  And many years ensuing,
  This wretched Knight did vainly seek
  The death that he was wooing.
  So, coming his last help to crave,                   45
  Heart-broken, upon Ellen's grave [6]
  His body he extended,
  And there his sorrow ended.

  Now ye, who willingly have heard
  The tale I have been telling,                        50
  May in Kirkonnel churchyard view
  The grave of lovely Ellen:
  By Ellen's side the Bruce is laid;
  And, for the stone upon his head,
  May no rude hand deface it,                          55
  And its forlorn Hic jacet.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  The Gordon ...     1800.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  But what is Gordon's beauteous face?
  And what are Gordon's crosses
  To them who sit by Kirtle's Braes
  Upon the verdant mosses?      1800.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  Proud Gordon cannot bear the thoughts      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1837.

  And, starting up, to Bruce's heart      1800.]


[Variant 5:

1837.

  Fair Ellen saw it when it came,
  And, stepping forth ...      1800.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  So coming back across the wave,
  Without a groan on Ellen's grave      1800.

  And coming back ...                   1802.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote A: The Kirtle is a River in the Southern part of Scotland, on
whose banks the events here related took place.--W. W. 1800.]



No Scottish ballad is superior in pathos to 'Helen of Kirkconnell'. It
is based on a traditionary tale--the date of the event being lost--but
the locality, in the parish of Kirkpatrick-Fleming in Dumfriesshire, is
known; and there the graves of "Burd Helen" and her lover are still
pointed out.

The following is Sir Walter Scott's account of the story:

  "A lady of the name of Helen Irving, or Bell (for this is disputed by
  the two clans), daughter of the laird of Kirkconnell in Dumfriesshire,
  and celebrated for her beauty, was beloved by two gentlemen in the
  neighbourhood. The name of the favoured suitor was Adam Fleming of
  Kirkpatrick: that of the other has escaped tradition, although it has
  been alleged he was a Bell of Blackel-house. The addresses of the
  latter were, however, favoured by the friends of the lady, and the
  lovers were therefore obliged to meet in secret, and by night, in the
  Churchyard of Kirkconnell, a romantic spot, surrounded by the river
  Kirtle. During one of their private interviews, the jealous and
  despised lover suddenly appeared on the opposite bank of the stream,
  and levelled his carbine at the breast of his rival. Helen threw
  herself before her lover, received in her bosom the bullet, and died
  in his arms. A desperate and mortal combat ensued between Fleming and
  the murderer, in which the latter was cut to pieces."

See 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border', vol. ii. p. 317.

The original ballad--well known though it is--may be quoted as an
admirable illustration of the different types of poetic genius in
dealing with the same, or a kindred, theme.


  I wish I were where Helen lies!
  Night and day on me she cries;
  O that I were where Helen lies,
    On fair Kirkconnell lee!

  Cursed be the heart that thought the thought,
  And curst the hand that fired the shot,
  When in my arms burd Helen dropt,
    And died to succour me!

  Oh think ye na my heart was sair,
  When my love dropt down and spake nae mair!
  There did she swoon wi' meikle care,
    On fair Kirkconnell lee.

  As I went down the water side,
  None but my foe to be my guide,
  None but my foe to be my guide,
    On fair Kirkconnell lee--

  I lighted down, my sword did draw,
  I hacked him in pieces sma',
  I hacked him in pieces sma',
    For her sake that died for me.

  Oh, Helen fair, beyond compare!
  I'll weave a garland of thy hair
  Shall bind my heart for evermair,
    Until the day I dee!

  Oh that I were where Helen lies!
  Day and night on me she cries;
  Out of my bed she bids me rise,
    Says, "Haste, and come to me!"

  O Helen fair! O Helen chaste!
  Were I with thee I would be blest,
  Where thou lies low and takes thy rest,
    On fair Kirkconnell lee.

  I wish my grave were growing green,
  A winding sheet drawn o'er my e'en,
  And I in Helen's arms lying
    On fair Kirkconnell lee.

  I wish I were where Helen lies!
  Night and day on me she cries,
  And I am weary of the skies,
    For her sake that died for me!


Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





HART-LEAP WELL


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


Hart-Leap Well is a small spring of water, about five miles from
Richmond in Yorkshire, and near the side of the road which leads from
Richmond to Askrigg. Its name is derived from a remarkable chace, the
memory of which is preserved by the monuments spoken of in the second
Part of the following Poem, which monuments do now exist as I have there
described them.--W. W. 1800.

[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. The first eight stanzas were composed
extempore one winter evening in the cottage, when, after having tired
myself with labouring at an awkward passage in 'The Brothers', I started
with a sudden impulse to this to get rid of the other, and finished it
in a day or two. My sister and I had passed the place a few weeks before
in our wild winter journey from Sockburn on the banks of the Tees to
Grasmere. A peasant whom we met near the spot told us the story so far
as concerned the name of the Well, and the Hart, and pointed out the
Stones. Both the stones and the well are objects that may easily be
missed. The tradition by this time may be extinct in the neighbourhood.
The man who related it to us was very old.--I. F.]

Included among the "Poems of the Imagination,"--Ed.




  The Knight had ridden down from Wensley Moor
  With the slow motion of a summer's cloud
  And now, as he approached a vassal's door,
  "Bring forth another horse!" he cried aloud. [1]

  "Another horse!"--That shout the vassal heard                   5
  And saddled his best Steed, a comely grey;
  Sir Walter mounted him; he was the third
  Which he had mounted on that glorious day.

  Joy sparkled in the prancing courser's eyes;
  The horse and horseman are a happy pair;                       10
  But, though Sir Walter like a falcon flies,
  There is a doleful silence in the air.

  A rout this morning left Sir Walter's Hall,
  That as they galloped made the echoes roar;
  But horse and man are vanished, one and all;                   15
  Such race, I think, was never seen before.

  Sir Walter, restless as a veering wind,
  Calls to the few tired dogs that yet remain:
  Blanch, [2] Swift, and Music, noblest of their kind,
  Follow, and up the weary mountain strain.                      20

  The Knight hallooed, he cheered and chid them on [3]
  With suppliant gestures [4] and upbraidings stern;
  But breath and eyesight fail; and, one by one,
  The dogs are stretched among the mountain fern.

  Where is the throng, the tumult of the race? [5]               25
  The bugles that so joyfully were blown?
--This chase it looks not like an earthly chase; [6]
  Sir Walter and the Hart are left alone.

  The poor Hart toils along the mountain-side;
  I will not stop to tell how far he fled,                       30
  Nor will I mention by what death he died;
  But now the Knight beholds him lying dead.

  Dismounting, then, he leaned against a thorn;
  He had no follower, dog, nor man, nor boy:
  He neither cracked [7] his whip, nor blew his horn,            35
  But gazed upon the spoil with silent joy.

  Close to the thorn on which Sir Walter leaned,
  Stood his dumb partner in this glorious feat; [8]
  Weak as a lamb the hour that it is yeaned;
  And white with foam as if with cleaving sleet. [9]             40

  Upon his side the Hart was lying stretched:
  His nostril touched [10] a spring beneath a hill,
  And with the last deep groan his breath had fetched
  The waters of the spring were trembling still.

  And now, too happy for repose or rest,                         45
  (Never had living man such joyful lot!) [11]
  Sir Walter walked all round, north, south, and west,
  And gazed and gazed upon that darling spot. [12]

  And climbing [13] up the hill--(it was at least
  Four [14] roods of sheer ascent) Sir Walter found              50
  Three several hoof-marks which the hunted Beast [15]
  Had left imprinted on the grassy [16] ground.

  Sir Walter wiped his face, and cried, "Till now
  Such sight was never seen by human [17] eyes:
  Three leaps have borne him from this lofty brow,               55
  Down to the very fountain where he lies.

  "I'll build a pleasure-house upon this spot,
  And a small arbour, made for rural joy;
  'Twill be the traveller's shed, the pilgrim's cot,
  A place of love for damsels that are coy.                      60

  "A cunning artist will I have to frame
  A basin for that fountain in the dell!
  And they who do make mention of the same,
  From this day forth, shall call it HART-LEAP WELL.

  "And, gallant Stag! [18] to make thy praises known,            65
  Another monument shall here be raised;
  Three several pillars, each a rough-hewn stone,
  And planted where thy hoofs the turf have grazed.

  "And, in the summer-time when days are long,
  I will come hither with my Paramour;                           70
  And with the dancers and the minstrel's song
  We will make merry in that pleasant bower.

  "Till the foundations of the mountains fail
  My mansion with its arbour shall endure;--
  The joy of them who till the fields of Swale,                  75
  And them who dwell among the woods of Ure!"

  Then home he went, and left the Hart, stone-dead,
  With breathless nostrils stretched above the spring.
--Soon did the Knight perform what he had said;
  And far and wide the fame thereof did ring. [19]               80

  Ere thrice the Moon into her port had steered,
  A cup of stone received the living well;
  Three pillars of rude stone Sir Walter reared,
  And built a house of pleasure in the dell.

  And near the fountain, flowers of stature tall                 85
  With trailing plants and trees were intertwined,--
  Which soon composed a little sylvan hall,
  A leafy shelter from the sun and wind.

  And thither, when the summer days were long
  Sir Walter led his wondering Paramour; [20]                    90
  And with the dancers and the minstrel's song
  Made merriment within that pleasant bower.

  The Knight, Sir Walter, died in course of time,
  And his bones lie in his paternal vale.--
  But there is matter for a second rhyme,                        95
  And I to this would add another tale.


PART SECOND

  The moving accident [A] is not my trade;
  To freeze the blood I have no ready arts:
  'Tis my delight, alone in summer shade,
  To pipe a simple song for [21] thinking hearts.                 100

  As I from Hawes to Richmond did repair,
  It chanced that I saw standing in a dell
  Three aspens at three corners of a square;
  And one, not four yards distant, near a well.

  What this imported I could ill divine:                          105
  And, pulling now the rein my horse to stop,
  I saw three pillars standing in a line,--
  The last stone-pillar on a dark hill-top.

  The trees were grey, with neither arms nor head:
  Half wasted the square mound of tawny green;                    110
  So that you just might say, as then I said,
  "Here in old time the hand of man hath [22] been."

  I looked upon the hill [23] both far and near,
  More doleful place did never eye survey;
  It seemed as if the spring-time came not here,                  115
  And Nature here were willing to decay.

  I stood in various thoughts and fancies lost, [B]
  When one, who was in shepherd's garb attired,
  Came up the hollow:--him did I accost,
  And what this place might be I then inquired.                   120

  The Shepherd stopped, and that same story told
  Which in my former rhyme I have rehearsed.
  "A jolly place," said he, "in times of old!
  But something ails it now: the spot is curst.

  "You see these lifeless stumps of aspen wood--125
  Some say that they are beeches, others elms--
  These were the bower; and here a mansion stood,
  The finest palace of a hundred realms!

  "The arbour does its own condition tell;
  You see the stones, the fountain, and the stream;               130
  But as to the great Lodge! you might as well
  Hunt half a day for a forgotten dream.

  "There's neither dog nor heifer, horse nor sheep,
  Will wet his lips within that cup of stone;
  And oftentimes, when all are fast asleep,                       135
  This water doth send forth a dolorous groan.

  "Some say that here a murder has been done,
  And blood cries out for blood: but, for my part,
  I've guessed, when I've been sitting in the sun,
  That it was all for that unhappy Hart.                          140

  "What thoughts must through the creature's brain have past!
  Even from the topmost stone, upon the steep, [24]
  Are but three bounds--and look, Sir, at this last--
  O Master! it has been a cruel leap.

  "For thirteen hours he ran a desperate race;                    145
  And in my simple mind we cannot tell
  What cause the Hart might have to love this place,
  And come and make his death-bed near the well.

  "Here on the grass perhaps asleep he sank,
  Lulled by the [25] fountain in the summer tide;                 150
  This water was perhaps the first he drank
  When he had wandered from his mother's side.

  "In April here beneath the flowering [26] thorn
  He heard the birds their morning carols sing;
  And he, perhaps, for aught we know, was born                    155
  Not half a furlong from that self-same spring.

  "Now, here is [27] neither grass nor pleasant shade;
  The sun on drearier hollow never shone;
  So will it be, as I have often said,
  Till trees, and stones, and fountain, all are gone."            160

  "Grey-headed Shepherd, thou hast spoken well;
  Small difference lies between thy creed and mine:
  This Beast not unobserved by Nature fell;
  His death was mourned by sympathy divine.

  "The Being, that is in the clouds and air,                      165
  That is in the green leaves among the groves,
  Maintains a deep and reverential care
  For the unoffending creatures [28] whom he loves.

  "The pleasure-house is dust:--behind, before,
  This is no common waste, no common gloom;                       170
  But Nature, in due course of time, once more
  Shall here put on her beauty and her bloom.

  "She leaves these objects to a slow decay,
  That what we are, and have been, may be known;
  But at the coming of the milder day,                            175
  These monuments shall all be overgrown.

  "One lesson, Shepherd, let us two divide,
  Taught both by what she shows, and what conceals; [C]
  Never to blend our pleasure or our pride
  With sorrow of the meanest thing that feels."                   180



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  He turn'd aside towards a Vassal's door,
  And, "Bring another Horse!" he cried aloud.     1800.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Brach, ...      1800.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  ... he chid and cheer'd them on      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1800.

  With fawning kindness ...     MS.]


[Variant 5:

1802.

  ... of the chace?      1800.]


[Variant 6:

1802.

  This race it looks not like an earthly race;     1800.]


[Variant 7:

1820.

  ... smack'd ...       1800.]


[Variant 8:

1820.

  ... act;      1800.]


[Variant 9:

1820.

  And foaming like a mountain cataract.      1800.]


[Variant 10:

1820.

  His nose half-touch'd ...     1800.]


[Variant 11:

1820.

  Was never man in such a joyful case,      1800.]


[Variant 12:

1820.

  .... place.       1800.]


[Variant 13:

1802.

  ... turning ...       1800.]


[Variant 14:

1845.

  Nine ...      1800.]


[Variant 15:

1802.

  Three several marks which with his hoofs the beast     1800.]


[Variant 16:

1820.

  ... verdant ...      1800.]


[Variant 17:

1836.

  ... living ...       1800.]


[Variant 18:

1827.

  ... gallant brute! ...      1800.]


[Variant 19:

1815.

  And soon the Knight perform'd what he had said,
  The fame whereof through many a land did ring.       1800.]


[Variant 20:

1820.

  ... journey'd with his paramour;      1800.]


[Variant 21:

1815.

  ... to ...     1800.]


[Variant 22:

1815.

  ... has ...      1800.]


[Variant 23:

1815.

  ... hills ...       1800.]


[Variant 24:

1815.

  From the stone on the summit of the steep      1800.

  ... upon ...                                   1802.]


[Variant 25:

1832.

  ... this ...      1800.]


[Variant 26:

1836.

  ... scented ...      1800.]


[Variant 27:

1827.

  But now here's ...     1800.]


[Variant 28:

1815.

  For them the quiet creatures ...      1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare 'Othello', act I. scene iii. l. 135:

  'Of moving accidents by flood and field.'

Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare the sonnet (vol. iv.) beginning:

  "Beloved Vale!" I said. "when I shall con ...

Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare Tennyson, 'In Memoriam', v. II. 3, 4.

  'For words, like Nature, half reveal
  And half conceal the Soul within.'

Ed.]



This poem was suggested to Wordsworth in December 1799 during the
journey with his sister from Sockburn in Yorkshire to Grasmere. I owe
the following local note on 'Hart-Leap Well' to Mr. John R. Tutin of
Hull.

  "June 20, 1881. Visited 'Hart-Leap Well,' the subject of Wordsworth's
  poem. It is situated on the road side leading from Richmond to
  Askrigg, at a distance of not more than three and a-half miles from
  Richmond, and not five miles as stated in the prefatory note to the
  poem. The 'three aspens at three corners of a square' are things of
  the past; also the 'three stone pillars standing in a line, on the
  hill above. In a straight line with the spring of water, and where the
  pillars would have been, a wall has been built; so that it is very
  probable the stone pillars were removed at the time of the building of
  this wall. The scenery around answers exactly to the description

    More doleful place did never eye survey;
    It seemed as if the spring time came not here,
    And Nature here were willing to decay.
    ...
    Now, here is neither grass nor pleasant shade.

  "It is barren moor for miles around. The water still falls into the
  'cup of stone,' which appeared to be of very long standing. Within ten
  yards of the well is a small tree, at the same side of the road as the
  well, on the right hand coming from Richmond."

The Rev. Thomas Hutchinson of Kimbolton wrote to me on June 18, 1883:

  "The tree is not a Thorn, but a Lime. It is evidently an old one, but
  is now in full and beautiful leaf. It stands on the western side of
  the road, and a few yards distant from it. The well is somewhat nearer
  the road. This side of the road is open to the fell. On the other side
  the road is bounded by a stone wall: another wall meeting this one at
  right angles, exactly opposite the well. I ascended the hill on the
  north side of this wall for some distance, but could find no trace of
  any rough-hewn stone. Descending on the other side, I found in the
  wall one, and only one, such stone. I should say the base was in the
  wall. The stone itself leans outwards; so that, at the top, three of
  its square faces can be seen; and two, if not three, of these faces
  bear marks of being hammer-dressed. The distance from the stone to the
  well is about 40 yards, and the height of the stone out of the ground
  about 3 or 4 feet.

  "The ascent from the well is a gentle one, not 'sheer'; nor does there
  appear to be any hollow by which the shepherd could ascend. On the
  western side of the road there is a wide plain, with a slight fall in
  that direction."


  "'Hart-Leap Well' is the tale for me; in matter as good as this
  ('Peter Bell'); in manner infinitely before it, in my poor judgment."

Charles Lamb to Wordsworth, May 1819. (See 'The Letters of Charles
Lamb', edited by Alfred Ainger, vol. ii. p. 20.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE IDLE SHEPHERD-BOYS; OR, DUNGEON-GHYLL FORCE [A]

A PASTORAL


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. I will only add a little monitory
anecdote concerning this subject. When Coleridge and Southey were
walking together upon the Fells, Southey observed that, if I wished to
be considered a faithful painter of rural manners, I ought not to have
said that my shepherd-boys trimmed their rustic hats as described in the
poem. Just as the words had passed his lips two boys appeared with the
very plant entwined round their hats. I have often wondered that
Southey, who rambled so much about the mountains, should have fallen
into this mistake, and I record it as a warning for others who, with far
less opportunity than my dear friend had of knowing what things are, and
far less sagacity, give way to presumptuous criticism, from which he was
free, though in this matter mistaken. In describing a tarn under
Helvellyn I say:

  "There sometimes doth a leaping fish
  Send through the tarn a lonely cheer."

This was branded by a critic of these days, in a review ascribed to Mrs.
Barbauld, as unnatural and absurd. I admire the genius of Mrs. Barbauld
and am certain that, had her education been favourable to imaginative
influences, no female of her day would have been more likely to
sympathise with that image, and to acknowledge the truth of the
sentiment.--I. F.]

Included among the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.




  The valley rings with mirth and joy;
  Among the hills the echoes play
  A never never ending song,
  To welcome in the May. [1]
  The magpie chatters with delight;                       5
  The mountain raven's youngling brood
  Have left the mother and the nest;
  And they go rambling east and west
  In search of their own food;
  Or through the glittering vapours dart                 10
  In very wantonness of heart.

  Beneath a rock, upon the grass,
  Two boys are sitting in the sun;
  Their work, if any work they have,
  Is out of mind--or done. [2]                           15
  On pipes of sycamore they play
  The fragments of a Christmas hymn;
  Or with that plant which in our dale
  We call stag-horn, or fox's tail,
  Their rusty hats they trim:                            20
  And thus, as happy as the day,
  Those Shepherds wear the time away.

  Along the river's stony marge
  The sand-lark chants a joyous song;
  The thrush is busy in the wood,                        25
  And carols loud and strong.
  A thousand lambs are on the rocks,
  All newly born! both earth and sky
  Keep jubilee, [B] and more than all,
  Those boys with their green coronal;                   30
  They never hear the cry,
  That plaintive cry! which up the hill
  Comes from the depth of Dungeon-Ghyll.

  Said Walter, leaping from the ground,
  "Down to the stump of yon old yew                      35
  We'll for our whistles run a race." [3]
--Away the shepherds flew;
  They leapt--they ran--and when they came
  Right opposite to Dungeon-Ghyll,
  Seeing that he should lose the prize,                  40
  "Stop!" to his comrade Walter cries--
  James stopped with no good will:
  Said Walter then, exulting; "Here
  You'll find a task for half a year. [4]

  "Cross, if you dare, where I shall cross--45
  Come on, and tread where I shall tread." [5]
  The other took him at his word,
  And followed as he led. [6]
  It was a spot which you may see
  If ever you to Langdale go;                            50
  Into a chasm a mighty block
  Hath fallen, and made a bridge of rock:
  The gulf is deep below;
  And, in a basin black and small,
  Receives a lofty waterfall.                            55

  With staff in hand across the cleft
  The challenger pursued [7] his march;
  And now, all eyes and feet, hath gained
  The middle of the arch.
  When list! he hears a piteous moan--60
  Again!--his heart within him dies--
  His pulse is stopped, his breath is lost,
  He totters, pallid as a ghost, [8]
  And, looking down, espies [9]
  A lamb, that in the pool is pent                       65
  Within that black and frightful rent.

  The lamb had slipped into the stream,
  And safe without a bruise or wound
  The cataract had borne him down
  Into the gulf profound.                                70
  His dam had seen him when he fell,
  She saw him down the torrent borne;
  And, while with all a mother's love
  She from the lofty rocks above
  Sent forth a cry forlorn,                              75
  The lamb, still swimming round and round,
  Made answer to that plaintive sound.

  When he had learnt what thing it was,
  That sent this rueful cry; I ween
  The Boy recovered heart, and told                      80
  The sight which he had seen.
  Both gladly now deferred their task;
  Nor was there wanting other aid--
  A Poet, one who loves the brooks
  Far better than the sages' books,                      85
  By chance had thither strayed;
  And there the helpless lamb he found
  By those huge rocks encompassed round.

  He drew it from the troubled pool, [10]
  And brought it forth into the light:                   90
  The Shepherds met him with his charge,
  An unexpected sight!
  Into their arms the lamb they took,
  Whose life and limbs the flood had spared; [11]
  Then up the steep ascent they hied,                    95
  And placed him at his mother's side;
  And gently did the Bard
  Those idle Shepherd-boys upbraid,
  And bade them better mind their trade.




The "bridge of rock" across Dungeon-Ghyll "chasm," and the "lofty
waterfall," with all its accessories of place as described in the poem,
remain as they were in 1800.--Ed.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1800.

  The valley rings with mirth and joy;
  And, pleased to welcome in the May,
  From hill to hill the echoes fling
  Their liveliest roundelay.    1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  It seems they have no work to do
  Or that their work is done.    1800.

  Boys that have had no work to do,
  Or work that now is done.      1827.]


[Variant 3:

1805.

  I'll run with you a race."--No more--1800.

  We'll for this Whistle run a race." ...    1802.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  Said Walter then, "Your task is here,
  'Twill keep you working half a year.    1800.

  'Twill baffle you for half a year.      1827.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

  Till you have cross'd where I shall cross,
  Say that you'll neither sleep nor eat."    1800.

  "Now cross where I shall cross,--come on
  And follow me where I shall lead--"        1802.

  "Cross, if you dare, where I shall cross--
  Come on, and in my footsteps tread!"       1827.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  James proudly took him at his word,
  But did not like the feat.         1800.

  ... the deed.                      1802.

  The other took him at his word,    1805.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

  ... began ...    1800.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

  ... pale as any ghost,    1800.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

  ... he spies    1800.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  He drew it gently from the pool,    1800.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

  Said they, "He's neither maim'd nor scarr'd"--1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: 'Ghyll', in the dialect of Cumberland and Westmoreland is a
short and for the most part a steep narrow valley, with a stream running
through it. 'Force' is the word universally employed in these dialects
for Waterfall.--W. W. 1800.

"Ghyll" was spelt "Gill" in the editions of 1800 to 1805.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare the 'Ode, Intimations of Immortality', iv. l. 3
(vol. viii.)--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE PET-LAMB

A PASTORAL


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. Barbara Lewthwaite, now living at
Ambleside (1843), though much changed as to beauty, was one of two most
lovely sisters. Almost the first words my poor brother John said, when
he visited us for the first time at Grasmere, were, "Were those two
Angels that I have just seen?" and from his description, I have no doubt
they were those two sisters. The mother died in childbed; and one of our
neighbours at Grasmere told me that the loveliest sight she had ever
seen was that mother as she lay in her coffin with her babe in her arm.
I mention this to notice what I cannot but think a salutary custom once
universal in these vales. Every attendant on a funeral made it a duty to
look at the corpse in the coffin before the lid was closed, which was
never done (nor I believe is now) till a minute or two before the corpse
was removed. Barbara Lewthwaite was not in fact the child whom I had
seen and overheard as described in the poem. I chose the name for
reasons implied in the above; and here will add a caution against the
use of names of living persons. Within a few months after the
publication of this poem, I was much surprised, and more hurt, to find
it in a child's school book, which, having been compiled by Lindley
Murray, had come into use at Grasmere School where Barbara was a pupil;
and, alas! I had the mortification of hearing that she was very vain of
being thus distinguished; and, in after life she used to say that she
remembered the incident, and what I said to her upon the occasion.--I.
F.]

Included among the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.




  The dew was falling fast, the stars began to blink;
  I heard a voice; it said, "Drink, pretty creature, drink!"
  And, looking o'er the hedge, before me I espied
  A snow white mountain-lamb with a Maiden at its side.

  Nor sheep nor kine [1] were near; the lamb was all alone,            5
  And by a slender cord was tethered to a stone;
  With one knee on the grass did the little Maiden kneel,
  While to that mountain-lamb she gave its evening meal.

  The lamb, while from her hand he thus his supper took,
  Seemed to feast with head and ears; and his tail with pleasure shook.
  "Drink, pretty creature, drink," she said in such a tone
  That I almost received her heart into my own.

  'Twas little Barbara Lewthwaite, a child of beauty rare!
  I watched them with delight, they were a lovely pair.
  Now with her empty can the Maiden turned away:                      15
  But ere ten yards were gone her footsteps did she stay.

  Right towards the lamb she looked; and from a shady place [2]
  I unobserved could see the workings of her face:
  If Nature to her tongue could measured numbers bring,
  Thus, thought I, to her lamb that little Maid might sing:           20

  "What ails thee, young One? what? Why pull so at thy cord?
  Is it not well with thee? well both for bed and board?
  Thy plot of grass is soft, and green as grass can be;
  Rest, little young One, rest; what is't that aileth thee?

  "What is it thou wouldst seek? What is wanting to thy heart?        25
  Thy limbs are they not strong? And beautiful thou art:
  This grass is tender grass; these flowers they have no peers;
  And that green corn all day is rustling in thy ears!

  "If the sun be [3] shining hot, do but stretch thy woollen chain,
  This beech is standing by, its covert thou canst gain;              30
  For rain and mountain-storms! the like thou need'st not fear,
  The rain and storm are things that [4] scarcely can come here.

  "Rest, little young One, rest; thou hast forgot the day
  When my father found thee first in places far away;
  Many flocks were [5] on the hills, but thou wert owned by none,     35
  And thy mother from thy side for evermore was gone.

  "He took thee in his arms, and in pity brought thee home:
  A blessed day for thee! then whither wouldst thou roam?
  A faithful nurse thou hast; the dam that did thee yean
  Upon the mountain tops no kinder could have been.                   40

  "Thou know'st that twice a day I have brought thee in this can
  Fresh water from the brook, as clear as ever ran;
  And twice in the day, when the ground is wet with dew
  I bring thee draughts of milk, warm milk it is and new.

  "Thy limbs will shortly be twice as stout as they are now,          45
  Then I'll yoke thee to my cart like a pony in the plough;
  My playmate thou shalt be; and when the wind is cold
  Our hearth shall be thy bed, our house shall be thy fold.

  "It will not, will not rest!--Poor creature, can it be
  That 'tis thy mother's heart which is working so in thee? [6]       50
  Things that I know not of belike to thee are dear,
  And dreams of things which thou canst neither see nor hear.

  "Alas, the mountain-tops that look so green and fair!
  I've heard of fearful winds and darkness that come there;
  The little brooks that seem all pastime and all play,               55
  When they are angry, roar like lions for their prey.

  "Here thou need'st not dread the raven in the sky;
  Night and day thou art safe,--our cottage is hard by.
  Why bleat so after me? Why pull so at thy chain?
  Sleep--and at break of day I will come to thee again!" [7]          60

--As homeward through the lane I went with lazy feet,
  This song to myself did I oftentimes repeat;
  And it seemed, as I retraced the ballad line by line,
  That but half of it was hers, and one half of it was _mine_. [8]

  Again, and once again, did I repeat the song;                       65
  "Nay," said I, "more than half to the damsel [9] must belong,
  For she looked with such a look, and she spake with such a tone,
  That I almost received her heart into my own."



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  No other sheep ...    1800.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  Towards the Lamb she look'd, and from that shady place    1800]


[Variant 3:

1802.

  ... is ...    1800.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  ... which ...    1800.]


[Variant 5:

1802.

  ... are ...    1800.]


[Variant 6:

1800.

  ... Poor creature, it must be
  That thou hast lost thy mother, and 'tis that which troubles thee.
MS.]


[Variant 7:

1802.

  ... the raven in the sky,
  He will not come to thee, our Cottage is hard by,
  Night and day thou art safe as living thing can be,
  Be happy then and rest, what is't that aileth thee?"    1800.]


[Variant 8: _Italics_ first used in 1815.]


[Variant 9: This word was _italicised_ from 1813 to 1832.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE FARMER OF TILSBURY VALE


Composed 1800.--Published 1815 [A]


[The character of this man was described to me, and the incident upon
which the verses turn was told me, by Mr. Poole of Nether Stowey, with
whom I became acquainted through our common friend, S. T. Coleridge.
During my residence at Alfoxden, I used to see much of him, and had
frequent occasions to admire the course of his daily life, especially
his conduct to his labourers and poor neighbours; their virtues he
carefully encouraged, and weighed their faults in the scales of charity.
If I seem in these verses to have treated the weaknesses of the farmer
and his transgressions too tenderly, it may in part be ascribed to my
having received the story from one so averse to all harsh judgment.
After his death was found in his escritoir, a lock of grey hair
carefully preserved, with a notice that it had been cut from the head of
his faithful shepherd, who had served him for a length of years. I need
scarcely add that he felt for all men as his brothers. He was much
beloved by distinguished persons--Mr. Coleridge, Mr. Southey, Sir H.
Davy, and many others; and in his own neighbourhood was highly valued as
a magistrate, a man of business, and in every other social relation. The
latter part of the poem perhaps requires some apology, as being too much
of an echo to 'The Reverie of Poor Susan'.--I.F.]

Included in the "Poems referring to the Period of Old Age."--Ed.




  'Tis not for the unfeeling, the falsely refined,
  The squeamish in taste, and the narrow of mind,
  And the small critic wielding his delicate pen,
  That I sing of old Adam, the pride of old men.

  He dwells in the centre of London's wide Town;                       5
  His staff is a sceptre--his grey hairs a crown;
  And his bright eyes look brighter, set off by the streak
  Of the unfaded rose that still blooms on his cheek. [1]

  'Mid the dews, in the sunshine of morn,--'mid the joy
  Of the fields, he collected that bloom, when a boy;                 10
  That countenance there fashioned, which, spite of a stain [2]
  That his life hath received, to the last will remain. [3]

  A Farmer he was; and his house [4] far and near
  Was the boast of the country [5] for excellent cheer:
  How oft have I heard in sweet Tilsbury Vale                         15
  Of the silver-rimmed horn whence he dealt his mild ale! [6]

  Yet Adam was far as the farthest from ruin,
  His fields seemed to know what their Master was doing;
  And turnips, and corn-land, [7] and meadow, and lea,
  All caught the infection--as generous as he.                        20

  Yet Adam prized little the feast and the bowl, [8]--
  The fields better suited the ease of his soul:
  He strayed through the fields like an indolent wight,
  The quiet of nature was Adam's delight.

  For Adam was simple in thought; and the poor,                       25
  Familiar with him, made an inn of his door:
  He gave them the best that he had; or, to say
  What less may mislead you, they took it away.
  [9]
  Thus thirty smooth years did he thrive on his farm:
  The Genius of plenty preserved him from harm:                       30
  At length, what to most is a season of sorrow,
  His means are [10] run out,--he must beg, or must borrow.

  To the neighbours he went,--all were free with their money;
  For his hive had so long been replenished with honey,
  That they dreamt not of dearth;--He continued his rounds, [11]      35
  Knocked here-and knocked there, pounds still adding to pounds.

  He paid what he could with his [12] ill-gotten pelf,
  And something, it might be, reserved for himself: [13]
  Then (what is too true) without hinting a word,
  Turned his back on the country--and off like a bird.                40

  You lift up your eyes!--but I guess that you frame
  A judgment too harsh of the sin and the shame; [14]
  In him it was scarcely [15] a business of art,
  For this he did all in the _ease_ [16] of his heart.

  To London--a sad emigration I ween--45
  With his grey hairs he went from the brook [17] and the green;
  And there, with small wealth but his legs and his hands,
  As lonely he stood as [18] a crow on the sands.

  All trades, as need [19] was, did old Adam assume,--
  Served as stable-boy, errand-boy, porter, and groom;                50
  But nature is gracious, necessity kind,
  And, in spite of the shame that may lurk in his mind, [20]
  [21]
  He seems ten birthdays younger, is green and is stout; [22]
  Twice as fast as before does his blood run about;
  You would [23] say that each hair of his beard was alive,           55
  And his fingers are busy as bees in a hive.

  For he's not like an Old Man that leisurely goes
  About work that he knows, [24] in a track that he knows;
  But often his mind is compelled to demur,
  And you guess that the more then his body must stir.                60

  In the throng of the town like a stranger is he,
  Like one whose own country's far over the sea;
  And Nature, while through the great city he hies,
  Full ten times a day takes his heart by surprise.

  This gives him the fancy of one that is young,                      65
  More of soul in his face than of words on [25] his tongue;
  Like a maiden of twenty he trembles and sighs,
  And tears of fifteen will come [26] into his eyes.

  What's a tempest to him, or the dry parching heats?
  Yet he watches the clouds that pass over the streets;               70
  With a look of such earnestness often will stand, [27]
  You might think he'd twelve reapers at work in the Strand.

  Where proud Covent-garden, in desolate hours
  Of snow and hoar-frost, spreads her fruits and her flowers,
  Old Adam will smile at the pains that have made                     75
  Poor winter look fine in such strange masquerade. [28]
  [29]
  'Mid coaches and chariots, a waggon of straw,
  Like a magnet, the heart of old Adam can draw;
  With a thousand soft pictures his memory will teem,
  And his hearing is touched with the sounds of a dream.              80

  Up the Haymarket hill he oft whistles his way,
  Thrusts his hands in a waggon, and smells at the hay; [30]
  He thinks of the fields he so often hath mown,
  And is happy as if the rich freight were his own. [31]

  But chiefly to Smithfield he loves to repair,--85
  If you pass by at morning, you'll meet with him there.
  The breath of the cows you may see him inhale,
  And his heart all the while is in Tilsbury Vale.

  Now farewell, old Adam! when low [32] thou art laid,
  May one blade of grass spring over [33] thy head;                   90
  And I hope that thy grave, wheresoever it be,
  Will hear the wind sigh through the leaves of a tree.




With this picture, which was taken from real life, compare the
imaginative one of 'The Reverie of Poor Susan' [vol. i. p. 226]; and see
(to make up the deficiencies of this class) 'The Excursion, passim'.--W.
W. 1837.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  Erect as a sunflower he stands, and the streak
  Of the unfaded rose is expressed on his cheek.    1815.

  ... still enlivens his cheek.                     1827.]


[Variant 2:

1840.

  There fashion'd that countenance, which, in spite of a stain     1815.]


[Variant 3:

    There's an old man in London, the prime of old men,
  You may hunt for his match through ten thousand and ten,
  Of prop or of staff, does he walk, does he run,
  No more need has he than a flow'r of the sun.    1800.

This stanza appeared only in 1800, occupying the place of the three
first stanzas in the final text.]


[Variant 4:

1815.

  ... name ...    1800.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  Was the Top of the Country, ...    1800.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  Not less than the skill of an Exchequer Teller
  Could count the shoes worn on the steps of his cellar.     1800.

  How oft have I heard in sweet Tilsbury Vale
  Of the silver-rimmed horn whence he dealt his good ale.    1815.]


[Variant 7:

1815.

  ... plough'd land, ...    1800.]


[Variant 8:

1815.

  ... the noise of the bowl,     1800]


[Variant 9:


  On the works of the world, on the bustle and sound,
  Seated still in his boat, he look'd leisurely round;
  And if now and then he his hands did employ,
  'Twas with vanity, wonder, and infantine joy.

Only in the text of 1800.]


[Variant 10:

1815.

  ... were ...     1800.]


[Variant 11:

1815.

  For they all still imagin'd his hive full of honey;
  Like a Church-warden, Adam continu'd his rounds,     1800.]


[Variant 12:

1837.

  ... this ...     1800.]


[Variant 13:

1815.

  ... he kept to himself;     1800.]


[Variant 14:

1820.

  You lift up your eyes, "O the merciless Jew!"
  But in truth he was never more cruel than you;     1800.

  ...--and I guess that you frame
  A judgment too harsh of the sin and the shame;     1815.]


[Variant 15:

1815.

  ... scarce e'en ...     1800.]


[Variant 16: _Italics_ first used in 1815.]


[Variant 17:

1815.

  ... lawn ...     1800.]


[Variant 18:

1815.

  He stood all alone like ...     1800.]


[Variant 19:

1800.

  ... needs ...     1815.

The edition of 1827 returns to the text of 1800.]


[Variant 20:

1815.

  Both stable-boy, errand-boy, porter and groom;
  You'd think it the life of a Devil in H--l,
  But nature was kind, and with Adam 'twas well.     1800.]


[Variant 21:

    He's ten birth-days younger, he's green, and he's stout,
  Twice as fast as before does his blood run about,
  You'd think it the life of a Devil in H--l,
  But Nature is kind, and with Adam 'twas well.

This stanza appeared only in 1800. It was followed by that which now
forms lines 53-56 of the final text.]


[Variant 22:

1815.

  He's ten birth-days younger, he's green, and he's stout,    1800.]


[Variant 23:

1815.

  You'd ...     1800.]


[Variant 24:

1815.

  ... does ...     1800.]


[Variant 25:

1815.

  ... in ...     1800.]


[Variant 26:

1800.

  ... have come ...     1815.

The text of 1820 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 27:

1815.

  ...he'll stand     1800.]


[Variant 28:

1837.

   Where proud Covent-Garden, in frost and in snow,
  Spreads her fruits and her flow'rs, built up row after row;
  Old Adam will point with his finger and say,
  To them that stand by, "I've seen better than they."    1800.

  ... her fruit ...                                       1815.

(The text of 1815 is otherwise identical with that of 1837.)]


[Variant 29:

  Where the apples are heap'd on the barrows in piles,
  You see him stop short, he looks long, and he smiles;
  He looks, and he smiles, and a Poet might spy
  The image of fifty green fields in his eye.

Only in the text of 1800.]


[Variant 30:

1837.

  ... in the waggons, and smells to the hay;    1800.

  ... in the Waggon, and smells at ...          1815.]


[Variant 31:

1815.

  ... has mown,
  And sometimes he dreams that the hay is his own.    1800.]


[Variant 32:

1815.

  ... where'er ...    1800.]


[Variant 33:

1850.

  ... spring up o'er ...    1800.

  ... over ...    1815.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: i. e. first published in the 1815 edition of the Poems:
but, although dated by Wordsworth 1803, it had appeared in 'The Morning
Post' of July 21, 1800, under the title, 'The Farmer of Tilsbury Vale. A
Character'. It was then unsigned.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





POEMS ON THE NAMING OF PLACES


ADVERTISEMENT

By Persons resident in the country and attached to rural objects, many
places will be found unnamed or of unknown names, where little Incidents
will have occurred, or feelings been experienced, which will have given
to such places a private and peculiar interest. From a wish to give some
sort of record to such Incidents or renew the gratification of such
Feelings, Names have been given to Places by the Author and some of his
Friends, and the following Poems written in consequence. [A]--W. W. 1800.


[Footnote A: It should be explained that owing to the chronological plan
adopted in this edition (see the preface to vol. i.), two of the poems
which were placed by Wordsworth in his series of "Poems on the Naming of
Places," but which belong to later years, are printed in subsequent
volumes.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"IT WAS AN APRIL MORNING: FRESH AND CLEAR"


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[Written at Grasmere. This poem was suggested on the banks of the brook
that runs through Easdale, which is, in some parts of its course, as
wild and beautiful as brook can be. I have composed thousands of verses
by the side of it.--I. F.]




  It was an April morning: fresh and clear
  The Rivulet, delighting in its strength,
  Ran with a young man's speed; and yet the voice
  Of waters which the winter had supplied
  Was softened down into a vernal tone.                       5
  The spirit of enjoyment and desire,
  And hopes and wishes, from all living things
  Went circling, like a multitude of sounds.
  The budding groves seemed eager to urge on
  The steps of June; as if their various hues                10
  Were only hindrances that stood between
  Them and their object: but, meanwhile, prevailed
  Such an entire contentment in the air [1]
  That every naked ash, and tardy tree
  Yet leafless, showed as if [2] the countenance             15
  With which it looked on this delightful day
  Were native to the summer.--Up the brook
  I roamed in the confusion of my heart,
  Alive to all things and forgetting all.
  At length I to a sudden turning came                       20
  In this continuous glen, where down a rock
  The Stream, so ardent in its course before,
  Sent forth such sallies of glad sound, that all
  Which I till then had heard, appeared the voice
  Of common pleasure: beast and bird, the lamb,              25
  The shepherd's dog, the linnet and the thrush
  Vied with this waterfall, and made a song,
  Which, while I listened, seemed like the wild growth
  Or like some natural produce of the air,
  That could not cease to be. Green leaves were here;        30
  But 'twas the foliage of the rocks--the birch,
  The yew, the holly, and the bright green thorn,
  With hanging islands of resplendent furze:
  And, on a summit, distant a short space,
  By any who should look beyond the dell,                    35
  A single mountain-cottage might be seen.
  I gazed and gazed, and to myself I said,
  "Our thoughts at least are ours; and this wild nook,
  My EMMA, I will dedicate to thee."
--Soon did the spot become my other home,                  40
  My dwelling, and my out-of-doors abode.
  And, of the Shepherds who have seen me there,
  To whom I sometimes in our idle talk
  Have told this fancy, two or three, perhaps,
  Years after we are gone and in our graves,                 45
  When they have cause to speak of this wild place,
  May call it by the name of EMMA'S DELL.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  The budding groves appear'd as if in haste
  To spur the steps of June; as if their shades
  Of _various_ green were hindrances that stood
  Between them and their object: yet, meanwhile,
  There was such deep contentment in the air     1800.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  ... seem'd as though ...    1800.]



The text of the "Poems on the Naming of Places" underwent comparatively
little alteration in successive editions. Both the changes in the first
poem were made in 1845. From the Fenwick note, it is evident that "the
Rivulet" was Easdale beck. But where was "Emma's Dell"? In the autumn of
1877, Dr. Cradock, the Principal of Brasenose College, Oxford, took me
to a place, of which he afterwards wrote,

  "I have a fancy for a spot just beyond Goody Bridge to the left, where
  the brook makes a curve, and returns to the road two hundred yards
  farther on. But I have not discovered a trace of authority in favour
  of the idea farther than that the wooded bend of the brook with the
  stepping stones across it, connected with a field-path recently
  stopped, was a very favourite haunt of Wordsworth's. At the upper part
  of this bend, near to the place where the brook returns to the road,
  is a deep pool at the foot of a rush of water. In this pool, a man
  named Wilson was drowned many years ago. He lived at a house on the
  hill called Score Crag, which, if my conjecture as to Emma's Dell is
  right, is the 'single mountain cottage' on a 'summit, distant a short
  space.' Wordsworth, happening to be walking at no great distance,
  heard a loud shriek. It was that of Mr. Wilson, the father, who had
  just discovered his son's body in the beck."

In the "Reminiscences" of the poet, by the Hon. Mr. Justice Coleridge,
which were contributed to the 'Memoirs of Wordsworth', written by his
nephew (vol. ii. pp. 300-315), there is a record of a walk they took up
Easdale to this place, entering the field just at the spot which Dr.
Cradock supposes to be "Emma's Dell."

  "He turned aside at a little farm-house, and took us into a swelling
  field to look down on the tumbling stream which bounded it, and which
  we saw precipitated at a distance, in a broad white sheet, from the
  mountain." (This refers to Easdale Force.) "Then, as he mused for an
  instant, he said,

    'I have often thought what a solemn thing it would be could we have
    brought to our mind at once all the scenes of distress and misery
    which any spot, however beautiful and calm before us, has been
    witness to since the beginning. That water break, with the glassy
    quiet pool beneath it, that looks so lovely, and presents no images
    to the mind but of peace--there, I remember, the only son of his
    father, a poor man who lived yonder, was drowned.'"

This walk and conversation took place in October 1836. If any one is
surprised that Wordsworth, supposing him to have been then looking into
the very dell on which he wrote the above poem in 1800, did not name it
to Mr. Coleridge, he must remember that he was not in the habit of
speaking of the places he had memorialised in verse, and that in 1836
his "Sister Emmeline" had for a year been a confirmed invalid at Rydal.
I have repeatedly followed Easdale beck all the way up from its junction
with the Rothay to the Tarn, and found no spot corresponding so closely
to the realistic detail of this poem as the one suggested by Dr.
Cradock. There are two places further up the dale where the "sallies of
glad sound" such as are referred to in the poem, are even more
distinctly audible; but they are not at "a sudden turning," as is the
spot above Goody Bridge. If one leaves the Easdale road at this bridge,
and keeps to the side of the beck for a few hundred yards, till he
reaches the turning,--especially if it be a bright April morning, such
as that described in the poem,--and remembers that this path by the
brook was a favourite resort of Wordsworth and his sister, the
probability of Dr. Cradock's suggestion will be apparent. Lady
Richardson, who knew the place, and appreciated the poem as thoroughly
as any of Wordsworth's friends, told me that she concurred in this
identification of the "dell."--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO JOANNA


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[Written at Grasmere. The effect of her laugh is an extravagance, though
the effect of the reverberation of voices in some parts of the mountains
is very striking. There is, in 'The Excursion', an allusion to the bleat
of a lamb thus re-echoed, and described without any exaggeration, as I
heard it, on the side of Stickle Tarn, from the precipice that stretches
on to Langdale Pikes.--I.F.]




  Amid the smoke of cities did you pass
  The time [1] of early youth; and there you learned,
  From years of quiet industry, to love
  The living Beings by your own fire-side,
  With such a strong devotion, that your heart                    5
  Is slow to meet [2] the sympathies of them
  Who look upon the hills with tenderness,
  And make dear friendships with the streams and groves.
  Yet we, who are transgressors in this kind,
  Dwelling retired in our simplicity                             10
  Among the woods and fields, we love you well,
  Joanna! and I guess, since you have been
  So distant from us now for two long years,
  That you will gladly listen to discourse,
  However trivial, if you thence be taught [3]                   15
  That they, with whom you once were happy, talk
  Familiarly of you and of old times.

    While I was seated, now some ten days past,
  Beneath those lofty firs, that overtop
  Their ancient neighbour, the old steeple-tower,                20
  The Vicar from his gloomy house hard by [A]
  Came forth to greet me; and when he had asked,
  "How fares Joanna, that wild-hearted Maid!
  And when will she return to us?" he paused;
  And, after short exchange of village news,                     25
  He with grave looks demanded, for what cause,
  Reviving obsolete idolatry,
  I, like a Runic Priest, in characters
  Of formidable size had chiselled out
  Some uncouth name upon the native rock,                        30
  Above the Rotha, by the forest-side.
--Now, by those dear immunities of heart
  Engendered between [4] malice and true love,
  I was not loth to be so catechised,
  And this was my reply:--"As it befel,                          35
  One summer morning we had walked abroad
  At break of day, Joanna and myself.
--'Twas that delightful season when the broom,
  Full-flowered, and visible on every steep,
  Along the copses runs in veins of gold.                        40
  Our pathway led us on to Rotha's banks;
  And when we came in front of that tall rock
  That eastward looks, I there stopped short--and stood [5]
  Tracing [6] the lofty barrier with my eye
  From base to summit; such delight I found                      45
  To note in shrub and tree, in stone and flower
  That intermixture of delicious hues,
  Along so vast a surface, all at once,
  In one impression, by connecting force
  Of their own beauty, imaged in the heart.                      50
--When I had gazed perhaps two minutes' space,
  Joanna, looking in my eyes, beheld
  That ravishment of mine, and laughed aloud.
  The Rock, like something starting from a sleep,
  Took up the Lady's voice, and laughed again;                   55
  That ancient Woman seated on Helm-crag
  Was ready with her cavern; Hammar-scar,
  And the tall Steep of Silver-how, sent forth
  A noise of laughter; southern Loughrigg heard,
  And Fairfield answered with a mountain tone;                   60
  Helvellyn far into the clear blue sky
  Carried the Lady's voice,--old Skiddaw blew
  His speaking-trumpet;--back out of the clouds
  Of Glaramara southward came the voice;
  And Kirkstone tossed it from his misty head.                   65
--Now whether (said I to our cordial Friend,
  Who in the hey-day of astonishment
  Smiled in my face) this were in simple truth
  A work accomplished by the brotherhood
  Of ancient mountains, or my ear was touched                    70
  With dreams and visionary impulses
  To me alone imparted, sure I am [7]
  That there was a loud uproar in the hills.
  And, while we both were listening, to my side
  The fair Joanna drew, as if she wished                         75
  To shelter from some object of her fear.
--And hence, long afterwards, when eighteen moons
  Were wasted, as I chanced to walk alone
  Beneath this rock, at sunrise, on a calm
  And silent morning, I sat down, and there,                     80
  In memory of affections old and true,
  I chiselled out in those rude characters
  Joanna's name deep in the living stone:--[8]
  And I, and all who dwell by my fireside,
  Have called the lovely rock, JOANNA'S ROCK."                   85



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  Your time ...     1800.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  Is slow towards...     1800.

  ... toward....         1827.]


[Variant 3:

1836.
  ... are taught...     1800.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  ... betwixt ...      1800.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

  Which looks towards the East, I there stopp'd short,       1800.

  ... toward ...                                             1827.]


[Variant 6:

1836.

  And trac'd ...      1800.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

  Is not for me to tell; but sure I am      1800]


[Variant 8:

1845.

  Joanna's name upon the living stone.      1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The Rectory at Grasmere, where Wordsworth lived from 1811
to 1813, and where two of his children died.--Ed.]


In Cumberland and Westmoreland are several Inscriptions upon the native
rock which from the wasting of Time and the rudeness of the Workmanship
had been mistaken for Runic. They are without doubt Roman.

The Rotha, mentioned in this poem, is the River which flowing through
the Lakes of Grasmere and Rydale falls into Wyndermere. On Helm-Crag,
that impressive single Mountain at the head of the Vale of Grasmere, is
a Rock which from most points of view bears a striking resemblance to an
Old Woman cowering. Close by this rock is one of those Fissures or
Caverns, which in the language of the Country are called Dungeons. The
other Mountains either immediately surround the Vale of Grasmere, or
belong to the same Cluster.--W. W. 1800.

Most of the Mountains here mentioned immediately surround the vale of
Grasmere; of the others, some are at a considerable distance, but they
belong to the same cluster.--W. W. 1802.

The majority of the changes introduced into the text of this poem were
made in the year 1836.

The place where the echo of the bleat of the lamb was heard--referred
to in the Fenwick note--may be easily found. The "precipice" is Pavy
Ark. "The 'lofty firs, that overtop their ancient neighbour, the old
steeple-tower,' stood by the roadside, scarcely twenty yards north-west
from the steeple of Grasmere church. Their site is now included in the
road, which has been widened at that point. They were Scotch firs of
unusual size, and might justly be said to 'overtop their neighbour' the
tower. Mr. Fleming Green, who well remembers the trees, gave me this
information, which is confirmed by other inhabitants.

  "When the road was enlarged, not many years ago, the roots of the
  trees were found by the workmen."

(Dr. Cradock to the editor.) The

          'tall rock
    That eastward looks'

by the banks of the Rotha, presenting a "lofty barrier" "from base to
summit," is manifestly a portion of Helmcrag. It is impossible to know
whether Wordsworth carved Joanna Hutchinson's name anywhere on Helmcrag,
and it is useless to enquire. If he did so, the discovery of the place
would not help any one to understand or appreciate the poem. It is
obvious that he did not intend to be literally exact in details, as the
poem was written in 1800, and addressed to Joanna Hutchinson,--who is
spoken of as having been absent from Grasmere "for two long years;" and
Wordsworth says that he carved the Runic characters 'in memoriam'
eighteen months after that summer morning when he heard the echo of her
laugh. But the family took up residence at Grasmere only in December
1799, and the "Poems on the Naming of Places" were published before the
close of 1800. The effect of these lines to Joanna, however, is
certainly not impaired--it may even be enhanced--by our inability to
localise them. Only one in the list of places referred to can occasion
any perplexity, viz., Hammar-scar, since it is a name now disused in the
district. It used to be applied to some rocks on the flank of
Silver-how, to the wood around them, and also to the gorge between
Silver-how and Loughrigg. Hammar, from the old Norse 'hamar', signifies
a steep broken rock.

The imaginative description of the echo of the lady's laugh suggests a
parallel passage from Michael Drayton's 'Polyolbion', which Wordsworth
must doubtless have read. (See his sister's reference to Drayton in her
'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland', in 1803: in the note to the
poem, 'At the grave of Burns', p. 382 of this volume.)


  'Which _Copland_ scarce had spoke, but quickly every Hill
  Upon her verge that stands, the neighbouring valleys fill;
  _Helvillon_ from his height, it through the mountains threw,
  From whence as soon again, the sound _Dunbalrase_ drew,
  From whose stone-trophed head, it on the _Wendrosse_ went,
  Which tow'rds the sea again, resounded it to _Dent_,
  That _Brodwater_ therewith within her banks astound,
  In sailing to the sea, told it to _Egremound_,
  Whose buildings, walks, and streets, with echoes loud and long,
  Did mightily commend old _Copland_ for her song.'

'Polyolbion', The Thirtieth Song, ll. 155-164.


Any one who compares this passage with Wordsworth's 'Joanna' will see
the difference between the elaborate fancy of a topographical narrator,
and the vivid imagination of a poetical idealist. A somewhat similar
instance of indebtedness--in which the debt is repaid by additional
insight--is seen when we compare a passage from Sir John Davies's
'Orchestra, or a poem on Dancing' (stanza 49), with one from 'The
Ancient Mariner', Part VI. stanzas 2 and 3--although there was more of
the true imaginative light in Davies than in Drayton.


  'For lo, the sea that fleets about the land,
    And like a girdle clips her solid waist,
  Music and measure both doth understand;
    For his great crystal eye is always cast
    Up to the moon, and on her fixed fast:
      And as she danceth in her palid sphere
      So danceth he about his centre here.'

DAVIES


    'Still as a slave before his lord,
    The ocean hath no blast;
    His great bright eye most silently
    Up to the moon is cast--

    If he may know which way to go;
    For she guides him smooth or grim.
    See, brother, see! how graciously
    She looketh down on him.'

COLERIDGE.


These extracts show how both Wordsworth and Coleridge assimilated past
literary products, and how they glorified them by reproduction. There
was little, however, in the poetic imagery of previous centuries that
Wordsworth reproduced. His imagination worked in a sphere of its own,
free from the trammels of precedent; and he was more original than any
other nineteenth century poet in his use of symbol and metaphor. The
poem 'To Joanna' was probably composed on August 22, 1800, as the
following occurs in Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal under that date:

  "William was composing all the morning ... W. read us the poem of
  Joanna, beside the Rothay, by the roadside."

Charles Lamb wrote to Wordsworth in January 1801, of

  "these continuous echoes in the story of 'Joanna's laugh,' when the
  mountains and all the scenery seem absolutely alive."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"THERE IS AN EMINENCE,--OF THESE OUR HILLS"


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[It is not accurate that the Eminence here alluded to could be seen from
our orchard-seat. It rises above the road by the side of Grasmere Lake
towards Keswick, and its name is Stone-Arthur.--I.F.]




  There is an Eminence,--of these our hills
  The last that parleys with the setting sun;
  We can behold it from our orchard-seat;
  And, when at evening we pursue our walk
  Along the public way, this Peak, [1] so high                 5
  Above us, and so distant in its height,
  Is visible; and often seems to send
  Its own deep quiet to restore our hearts.
  The meteors make of it a favourite haunt:
  The star of Jove, so beautiful and large                    10
  In the mid heavens, is never half so fair
  As when he shines above it. 'Tis in truth
  The loneliest place we have among the clouds.
  And She who dwells with me, whom I have loved
  With such communion, that no place on earth                 15
  Can ever be a solitude to me,
  Hath to this lonely Summit given my Name. [2]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1840.

  ... this Cliff, ...    1800.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

  Hath said, this lonesome Peak shall bear my Name.    1800.]



Stone-Arthur is the name of the hill, on the east side of the Vale of
Grasmere, opposite Helm Crag, and between Green Head Ghyll and Tongue
Ghyll.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"A NARROW GIRDLE OF ROUGH STONES AND CRAGS"


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[The character of the eastern shore of Grasmere Lake is quite changed
since these verses were written, by the public road being carried along
its side. The friends spoken of were Coleridge and my Sister, and the
facts occurred strictly as recorded.--I.F.]




  A narrow girdle of rough stones and crags,
  A rude and natural causeway, interposed
  Between the water and a winding slope
  Of copse and thicket, leaves the eastern shore
  Of Grasmere safe in its own privacy: [A]                     5
  And there myself and two beloved Friends,
  One calm September morning, ere the mist
  Had altogether yielded to the sun,
  Sauntered on this retired and difficult way.
--Ill suits the road with one in haste; but we              10
  Played with our time; and, as we strolled along,
  It was our occupation to observe
  Such objects as the waves had tossed ashore--
  Feather, or leaf, or weed, or withered bough,
  Each on the other heaped, along the line                    15
  Of the dry wreck. And, in our vacant mood,
  Not seldom did we stop to watch some tuft
  Of dandelion seed or thistle's beard,
  That skimmed the surface of the dead calm lake,
  Suddenly halting now--a lifeless stand!                     20
  And starting off again with freak as sudden; [1]
  In all its sportive wanderings, all the while,
  Making report of an invisible breeze
  That was its wings, its chariot, and its horse,
  Its playmate, rather say, its moving soul. [2]              25
  --And often, trifling with a privilege
  Alike indulged to all, we paused, one now,
  And now the other, to point out, perchance
  To pluck, some flower or water-weed, too fair
  Either to be divided from the place                         30
  On which it grew, or to be left alone
  To its own beauty. Many such there are,
  Fair ferns and flowers, and chiefly that tall fern, [3]
  So stately, of the queen Osmunda named;
  Plant lovelier, in its own retired abode                    35
  On Grasmere's beach, than Naiad by the side
  Of Grecian brook, or Lady of the Mere,
  Sole-sitting by the shores of old romance.
--So fared we that bright [4] morning: from the fields,
  Meanwhile, a noise was heard, the busy mirth                40
  Of reapers, men and women, boys and girls.
  Delighted much to listen [5] to those sounds,
  And feeding thus our fancies, we advanced [6]
  Along the indented shore; when suddenly,
  Through a thin veil of glittering haze was seen [7]         45
  Before us, on a point of jutting land,
  The tall and upright figure of a Man
  Attired in peasant's garb, who stood alone,
  Angling beside the margin of the lake. [8]
  "Improvident and reckless," we exclaimed,                   50
  "The Man must be, who thus can lose a day [9]
  Of the mid harvest, when the labourer's hire
  Is ample, and some little might be stored
  Wherewith to cheer him in the winter time."
  Thus talking of that Peasant, we approached                 55
  Close to the spot where with his rod and line
  He stood alone; whereat he turned his head
  To greet us--and we saw a Man worn down
  By sickness, gaunt and lean, with sunken cheeks
  And wasted limbs, his legs so long and lean                 60
  That for my single self I looked at them,
  Forgetful of the body they sustained.--
  Too weak to labour in the harvest field,
  The Man was using his best skill to gain
  A pittance from the dead unfeeling lake                     65
  That knew not of his wants. I will not say
  What thoughts immediately were ours, nor how
  The happy idleness of that sweet morn,
  With all its lovely images, was changed
  To serious musing and to self-reproach.                     70
  Nor did we fail to see within ourselves
  What need there is to be reserved in speech,
  And temper all our thoughts with charity.
--Therefore, unwilling to forget that day,
  My Friend, Myself, and She who then received                75
  The same admonishment, have called the place
  By a memorial name, uncouth indeed
  As e'er by mariner was given to bay
  Or foreland, on a new-discovered coast;
  And POINT RASH-JUDGMENT is the name it bears.               80



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815. (Compressing five lines into three.)

  ... thistle's beard,
  Which, seeming lifeless half, and half impell'd
  By some internal feeling, skimm'd along
  Close to the surface of the lake that lay
  Asleep in a dead calm, ran closely on
  Along the dead calm lake, now here, now there,    1800.]


[Variant 2:

1820.

  Its very playmate, and its moving soul.    1800.]


[Variant 3:

1802.

  ... tall plant ...   1800.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  ... sweet ...   1800.]


[Variant 5:

1800.

  ... with listening ... C.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

  And in the fashion which I have describ'd,
  Feeding unthinking fancies, we advanc'd    1800.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

  ... we saw   1800.]


[Variant 8:

1800.

  ... a lake.   1802.

The text of 1815 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

  ... the margin of the lake.
  That way we turn'd our steps; nor was it long,
  Ere making ready comments on the sight
  Which then we saw, with one and the same voice
  We all cried out, that he must be indeed
  An idle man, who thus could lose a day      1800.

  Did all cry out, that he must be indeed
  An Idler, he who thus ...                   1815.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: A new road has destroyed this retirement. (MS. footnote in
Lord Coleridge's copy of the edition of 1836.)--Ed.]


The text of this poem reached its final state in the edition of 1827.
The same is true of the poem which follows, 'To M. H.', with the
exception of a single change.

In Wordsworth's early days at Grasmere, a wild woodland path of quiet
beauty led from Dove Cottage along the margin of the lake to the "Point"
referred to in this poem, leaving the eastern shore truly "safe in its
own privacy"--a "retired and difficult way"; the high-way road for
carriages being at that time over White Moss Common. The late Dr.
Arnold, of Rugby and Foxhowe, used to name the three roads from Rydal to
Grasmere thus: the highest, "Old Corruption"; the intermediate, "Bit by
bit Reform"; the lowest and most level, "Radical Reform." Wordsworth was
never quite reconciled to the radical reform effected on a road that
used to be so delightfully wild and picturesque. The spot which the
three friends rather infelicitously named "Point Rash-Judgment" is
easily identified; although, as Wordsworth remarks, the character of the
shore is changed by the public road being carried along its side. The
friends were quite aware that the "memorial name" they gave it was
"uncouth." In spite of its awkwardness, however, it will probably
survive; if not for Browning's reason

  'The better the uncouther;
  Do roses stick like burrs?'

at least because of the incident which gave rise to the poem.
The date of composition is fixed by Dorothy Wordsworth's
Journal,

  "10th Oct. 1800, Wm. sat up after me, writing 'Point
  Rash-Judgment.'"

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO M. H.


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[To Mary Hutchinson, two years before our marriage. The pool alluded to
is in Rydal Upper Park.--I.F.]




  Our walk was far among the ancient trees:
  There was no road, nor any woodman's path;
  But a [1] thick umbrage--checking the wild growth
  Of weed and sapling, along soft green turf [2]
  Beneath the branches--of itself had made                         5
  A track, that [3] brought us to a slip of lawn,
  And a small bed of water in the woods.
  All round this pool both flocks and herds might drink
  On its firm margin, even as from a well,
  Or some stone-basin which the herdsman's hand                   10
  Had shaped for their refreshment; nor did sun,
  Or wind from any quarter, ever come,
  But as a blessing to this calm recess,
  This glade of water and this one green field.
  The spot was made by Nature for herself;                        15
  The travellers know it not, and 'twill remain
  Unknown to them; but it is beautiful;
  And if a man should plant his cottage near,
  Should sleep beneath the shelter of its trees,
  And blend its waters with his daily meal,                       20
  He would so love it, that in his death-hour
  Its image would survive among his thoughts:
  And therefore, my sweet MARY, this still Nook,
  With all its beeches, we have named from You! [4]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  But the ...    1800.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  ... on the soft green turf    1800.

  ... smooth dry ground         MS.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  ... which ...       1800.]


[Variant 4:

1800.

  ... for You.       1802.

The text of 1815 returns to that of 1800.]


To find the pool referred to in the Fenwick note, I have carefully
examined the course of Rydal beck, all the way up to the foot of the
Fell. There is a pool beyond the enclosures of the Hall property, about
five hundred feet above Rydal Mount, which partly corresponds to the
description in the poem, but there is no wood around it now; and the
trees which skirt its margin are birch, ash, oak, and hazel, but there
are no beeches. It is a short way below some fine specimens of ice-worn
rocks, which are to the right of the stream as you ascend it, and above
these rocks is a well-marked moraine. It is a deep crystal pool, and has
a "firm margin" of (artificially placed) stones. This may be the spot
described in the poem; or another, within the grounds of the Hall, may
be the place referred to. It is a sequestered nook, beside the third
waterfall as you ascend the beck--this third cascade being itself a
treble fall. Seen two or three days after rain, when the stream is full
enough to break over the whole face of the rock in showers of snowy
brightness, yet low enough to shew the rock behind its transparent veil,
it is specially beautiful. Trees change so much in eighty years that the
absence of "beeches" now would not make this site impossible. In a MS.
copy of the poem (of date Dec. 28, 1800), the last line is

  'With all its poplars, we have named from you.'

Of the circular pool beneath this fall it may be said, as Wordsworth
describes it, that

  '... both flocks and herds might drink
  On its firm margin, even as from a well;'

and a "small slip of lawn" might easily have existed there in his time.
We cannot, however, be confident as to the locality, and I add the
opinion of several, whose judgment may be deferred to. Dr. Cradock
writes:

  "As to Mary Hutchinson's pool, I think that it was not on the beck
  anywhere, but some detached little pool, far up the hill, to the
  eastwards of the Hall, in 'the woods.' The description does not well
  suit any part of Rydal beck; and no spot thereon could long 'remain
  unknown,' as the brook was until lately much haunted by anglers."

My difficulty as to a site "far up the hill" is, that it must have been
a pool of some size, if "both flocks and herds might drink" all round
it; and there is no stream, scarce even a rill that joins Rydal beck on
the right, all the way up from its junction with the Rothay. The late
Mr. Hull of Rydal Cottage, wrote:

  "Although closely acquainted with every nook about Rydal Park, I have
  never been able to discover any spot corresponding to that described
  in Wordsworth's lines to M. H. It is possible, however, that the
  'small bed of water' may have been a temporary rain pool, such as
  sometimes lodges in the hollows on the mountain-slope after heavy
  rain."

Mr. F. M. Jones, the agent of the Rydal property, writes:

  "I do not know of any pool of water in the Upper Rydal Park. There are
  some pools up the river, 'Mirror Pool' among them; but I hardly think
  there can ever have been 'beech-trees' growing near them."

There are many difficulties, and the place cannot now be identified.
Wordsworth's own wish will doubtless be realised,

  'The travellers know it not, and 'twill remain
  Unknown to them.'

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE WATERFALL AND THE EGLANTINE


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[Suggested nearer to Grasmere, in the same mountain track as that
referred to in the following note. The Eglantine remained many years
afterwards, but is now gone.--I.F.]

Included among the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  I      "Begone, thou fond presumptuous Elf,"
          Exclaimed an angry Voice, [1]
          "Nor dare to thrust thy foolish self
          Between me and my choice!"
          A small Cascade fresh swoln with snows                5
          Thus threatened a poor Briar-rose, [2]
          That, all bespattered with his foam,
          And dancing high and dancing low,
          Was living, as a child might know,
          In an unhappy home.                                  10

  II      "Dost thou presume my course to block?
          Off, off! or, puny Thing!
          I'll hurl thee headlong with the rock
          To which thy fibres cling."
          The Flood was tyrannous and strong; [A]              15
          The patient Briar suffered long,
          Nor did he utter groan or sigh,
          Hoping the danger would be past;
          But, seeing no relief, at last,
          He ventured to reply.                                20

  III     "Ah!" said the Briar, "blame me not;
          Why should we dwell in strife?
          We who in this sequestered spot [3]
          Once lived a happy life!
          You stirred me on my rocky bed--25
          What pleasure through my veins you spread
          The summer long, from day to day,
          My leaves you freshened and bedewed;
          Nor was it common gratitude
          That did your cares repay.                           30

  IV      "When spring came on with bud and bell, [B]
          Among these rocks did I
          Before you hang my wreaths [4] to tell
          That gentle days were nigh!
          And in the sultry summer hours,                      35
          I sheltered you with leaves and flowers;
          And in my leaves--now shed and gone,
          The linnet lodged, and for us two
          Chanted his pretty songs, when you
          Had little voice or none.                            40

  V       "But now proud thoughts are in your breast--
          What grief is mine you see,
          Ah! would you think, even yet how blest
          Together we might be!
          Though of both leaf and flower bereft,               45
          Some ornaments to me are left--
          Rich store of scarlet hips is mine,
          With which I, in my humble way,
          Would deck you many a winter day, [5]
          A happy Eglantine!"                                  50

  VI      What more he said I cannot tell,
          The Torrent down the rocky dell
          Came thundering loud and fast; [6]
          I listened, nor aught else could hear;
          The Briar quaked--and much I fear                    55
          Those accents were his last.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... a thundering Voice,        1800.]


[Variant 2:

1820.

  A falling Water swoln with snows
  Thus spake to a poor Briar-rose,      1800.]


[Variant 3:

1820.

  ... in this, our natal spot,      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1815.

  ... wreath ...      1800.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

  ... Winter's day,      1800.]


[Variant 6:

1840.

  The stream came thundering down the dell
  And gallop'd loud and fast;      1800.

  The Torrent thundered down the dell
  With unabating haste;            1815.

  With aggravated haste;           1827.

  The Stream came thundering down the dell       1836.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare 'The Ancient Mariner' (part I. stanza II.):

  And now the Storm-blast came, and he
  Was tyrannous and strong.

Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare 'A Farewell', p. 325, l. 17.--Ed.]



The spot referred to in this poem can be identified with perfect
accuracy. The Eglantine grew on the little brook that runs past two
cottages (close to the path under Nab Scar), which have been built since
the poet's time, and are marked Brockstone on the Ordnance Map.

  "The plant itself of course has long disappeared: but in following up
  the rill through the copse, above the cottages, I found an unusually
  large Eglantine, growing by the side of the stream."

(Dr Cradock to the editor, in 1877.) It still grows luxuriantly there.

The following extract from Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal illustrates both
this and the next poem:

  "Friday, 23rd April 1802.--It being a beautiful morning, we set off at
  eleven o'clock, intending to stay out of doors all the morning. We
  went towards Rydal, under Nab Scar. The sun shone and we were lazy.
  Coleridge pitched upon several places to sit down upon; but we could
  not be all of one mind respecting sun and shade, so we pushed on to
  the foot of the Scar. It was very grand when we looked up, very stony;
  here and there a budding tree. William observed that the umbrella
  Yew-tree that breasts the wind had lost its character as a tree, and
  had become like solid wood. Coleridge and I pushed on before. We left
  William sitting on the stones, feasting with silence, and I sat down
  upon a rocky seat, a couch it might be, under the Bower of William's
  'Eglantine,' 'Andrew's Broom.' He was below us, and we could see him.
  He came to us, and repeated his Poems, while we sat beside him. We
  lingered long, looking into the vales; Ambleside Vale, with the
  copses, the village under the hill, and the green fields; Rydale, with
  a lake all alive and glittering, yet but little stirred by breezes;
  and our own dear Grasmere, making a little round lake of Nature's own,
  with never a house, never a green field, but the copses and the bare
  hills enclosing it, and the river flowing out of it. Above rose the
  Coniston Fells, in their own shape and colour, ... the sky, and the
  clouds, and a few wild creatures. Coleridge went to search for
  something new. We saw him climbing up towards a rock. He called us,
  and we found him in a bower,--the sweetest that was ever seen. The
  rock on one side is very high, and all covered with ivy, which hung
  loosely about, and bore bunches of brown berries. On the other side,
  it was higher than my head. We looked down on the Ambleside vale, that
  seemed to wind away from us, the village lying under the hill. The fir
  tree island was reflected beautifully.... About this bower there is
  mountain-ash, common ash, yew tree, ivy, holly, hawthorn, roses,
  flowers, and a carpet of moss. Above at the top of the rock there is
  another spot. It is scarce a bower, a little parlour, not enclosed by
  walls, but shaped out for a resting-place by the rocks, and the ground
  rising about it. It had a sweet moss carpet. We resolved to go and
  plant flowers, in both these places to-morrow."

This extract is taken from the "Journal" as originally transcribed by me
in 1889. When it appears in this edition it will be greatly
enlarged.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE OAK AND THE BROOM


A PASTORAL


Composed 1800.--Published 1800

[Suggested upon the mountain pathway that leads from Upper Rydal to
Grasmere. The ponderous block of stone, which is mentioned in the poem,
remains, I believe, to this day, a good way up Nab-Scar. Broom grows
under it, and in many places on the side of the precipice.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  I       His simple truths did Andrew glean
          Beside the babbling rills;
          A careful student he had been
          Among the woods and hills.
          One winter's night, when through the trees                5
          The wind was roaring, [1] on his knees
          His youngest born did Andrew hold:
          And while the rest, a ruddy quire,
          Were seated round their blazing fire,
          This Tale the Shepherd told.                             10

  II      "I saw a crag, a lofty stone
          As ever tempest beat!
          Out of its head an Oak had grown,
          A Broom out of its feet.
          The time was March, a cheerful noon--15
          The thaw wind, with the breath of June,
          Breathed gently from the warm south-west:
          When, in a voice sedate with age,
          This Oak, a giant and a sage, [2]
          His neighbour thus addressed:--20

  III     "'Eight weary weeks, through rock and clay,
          Along this mountain's edge,
          The Frost hath wrought both night and day,
          Wedge driving after wedge.
          Look up! and think, above your head                      25
          What trouble, surely, will be bred;
          Last night I heard a crash--'tis true,
          The splinters took another road--
          I see them yonder--what a load
          For such a Thing as you!                                 30

  IV      "'You are preparing as before
          To deck your slender shape;
          And yet, just three years back--no more--
          You had a strange escape:
          Down from yon cliff a fragment broke;                    35
          It thundered down, with fire and smoke,
          And hitherward pursued its way; [3]
          This ponderous block was caught by me,
          And o'er your head, as you may see,
          'Tis hanging to this day!                                40

  V       "'If breeze or bird to this rough steep
          Your kind's first seed did bear;
          The breeze had better been asleep,
          The bird caught in a snare: [4]
          For you and your green twigs decoy                       45
          The little witless shepherd-boy
          To come and slumber in your bower;
          And, trust me, on some sultry noon,
          Both you and he, Heaven knows how soon!
          Will perish in one hour.                                 50

  VI      "'From me this friendly warning take'--
          The Broom began to doze,
          And thus, to keep herself awake,
          Did gently interpose:
          'My thanks for your discourse are due;                   55
          That more than what you say is true, [5]
          I know, and I have known it long;
          Frail is the bond by which we hold
          Our being, whether young or old, [6]
          Wise, foolish, weak, or strong.                          60

  VII     "'Disasters, do the best we can,
          Will reach both great and small;
          And he is oft the wisest man,
          Who is not wise at all.
          For me, why should I wish to roam?                       65
          This spot is my paternal home,
          It is my pleasant heritage;
          My father many a happy year,
          Spread here [7] his careless blossoms, here
          Attained a good old age.                                 70

  VIII    "'Even such as his may be my lot.
          What cause have I to haunt
          My heart with terrors? Am I not
          In truth a favoured plant!
          On me such bounty Summer pours,                          75
          That I am covered o'er with flowers; [8]
          And, when the Frost is in the sky,
          My branches are so fresh and gay
          That you might look at me [9] and say,
          This Plant can never die.                                80

  IX      "'The butterfly, all green and gold,
          To me hath often flown,
          Here in my blossoms to behold
          Wings lovely as his own.
          When grass is chill with rain or dew,                    85
          Beneath my shade, the mother-ewe
          Lies with her infant lamb; I see
          The love they to each other make,
          And the sweet joy which they partake,
          It is a joy to me.'                                      90

  X       "Her voice was blithe, her heart was light;
          The Broom might have pursued
          Her speech, until the stars of night
          Their journey had renewed;
          But in the branches of the oak                           95
          Two ravens now began to croak
          Their nuptial song, a gladsome air;
          And to her own green bower the breeze
          That instant brought two stripling bees
          To rest, or [10] murmur there.                          100


  XI      "One night, my Children! from the north
          There came a furious blast; [11]
          At break of day I ventured forth,
          And near the cliff I passed.
          The storm had fallen upon the Oak,                      105
          And struck him with a mighty stroke,
          And whirled, and whirled him far away;
          And, in one hospitable cleft,
          The little careless Broom was left
          To live for many a day."                                110



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1820.

  ... thundering, ...      1800.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

  ... half giant and half sage,      1800.]


[Variant 3:

1820.

  It came, you know, with fire and smoke
  And hither did it bend its way.       1800.

  And hitherward it bent its way.       1802.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  The Thing had better been asleep,
  Whatever thing it were,
  Or Breeze, or Bird, or fleece of Sheep,
  That first did plant you there.            1800.

  Or Breeze, or Bird, or Dog, or Sheep,      1802.]


[Variant 5:

1820.

  That it is true, and more than true,      1800.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  ... be we young or old,      1800.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

  Here spread ...      1800.]


[Variant 8:

1815.

  The Spring for me a garland weaves
  Of yellow flowers and verdant leaves,      1800.]


[Variant 9:

1802.

  ... on me ...      1800.]


[Variant 10:

1827.

  To feed and ...    1800.

  To rest and ...    1815.]


[Variant 11:

1815.

  One night the Wind came from the North
  And blew a furious blast,    1800.]



The spot is fixed within narrow limits by the Fenwick note. It is,
beyond doubt, on the wooded part of Nab-Scar, through which the upper
path from Grasmere to Rydal passes. There is one huge block of stone
high above the path, which answers well to the description in the second
stanza. Crabb Robinson wrote in his 'Diary' (Sept. 11, 1816):

  "The poem of 'The Oak and the Broom' proceeded from his" (Wordsworth)
  "beholding a tree in just such a situation as he described the broom
  to be in."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"'TIS SAID, THAT SOME HAVE DIED FOR LOVE"


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


One of the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  'Tis said, that some have died for love:
  And here and there a church-yard grave is found
  In the cold north's unhallowed ground,
  Because the wretched man himself had slain,
  His love was such a grievous pain.                            5
  And there is one whom I five years have known;
  He dwells alone
  Upon Helvellyn's side:
  He loved--the pretty Barbara died;
  And thus he makes his moan:                                  10
  Three years had Barbara in her grave been laid
  When thus his moan he made:

  "Oh, move, thou Cottage, from behind that oak!
  Or let the aged tree uprooted lie,
  That in some other way yon smoke                             15
  May mount into the sky!
  The clouds pass on; they from the heavens depart:
  I look--the sky is empty space;
  I know not what I trace;
  But when I cease to look, my hand is on my heart.            20

  "O! what a weight is in these shades! Ye leaves,
  That murmur once so dear, when will it cease?
  Your sound my heart of rest bereaves,
  It robs my heart of peace. [1]
  Thou Thrush, that singest loud--and loud and free,           25
  Into yon row of willows flit,
  Upon that alder sit;
  Or sing another song, or choose another tree.

  "Roll back, sweet Rill! back to thy mountain-bounds,
  And there for ever be thy waters chained!                    30
  For thou dost haunt the air with sounds
  That cannot be sustained;
  If still beneath that [2] pine-tree's ragged bough
  Headlong yon waterfall must come,
  Oh let it then be dumb!                                      35
  Be anything, sweet Rill, but that which thou art now.

  "Thou Eglantine, so bright with sunny showers,
  Proud as a rainbow spanning half the vale, [3]
  Thou one fair shrub, oh! shed thy flowers,
  And stir not in the gale.                                    40
  For thus to see thee nodding in the air,
  To see thy arch thus stretch and bend,
  Thus rise and thus descend,--
  Disturbs me till the sight is more than I can bear."

  The Man who makes this feverish complaint                    45
  Is one of giant stature, who could dance
  Equipped from head to foot in iron mail.
  Ah gentle Love! if ever thought was thine
  To store up kindred hours for me, thy face
  Turn from me, gentle Love! nor let me walk                   50
  Within the sound of Emma's voice, nor [4] know
  Such happiness as I have known to-day.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... Ye leaves,
  When will that dying murmur be suppress'd?
  Your sound my heart of peace bereaves,
  It robs my heart of rest.      1800.]


[Variant 2:

1800.

  ... yon ...      MS.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  Thou Eglantine whose arch so proudly towers
  (Even like a rainbow ...      1800.

  ... the rainbow ...           1802.

The text of 1815 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  ... or ...      1800.]



If the second, third, and fourth stanzas of this poem had been published
without the first, the fifth, and the last, it would have been deemed an
exquisite fragment by those who object to the explanatory preamble, and
to the moralising sequel. The intermediate stanzas suggest Burns's

  'Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon,
    How can ye bloom sae fresh and fair!
  How can ye chant, ye little birds,
    An' I sae weary, fu' o' care!'

and Browning's 'May and Death':

  'I wish that when you died last May,
    Charles, there had died along with you
  Three parts of spring's delightful things;
    Ay, and, for me, the fourth part too.'

This mood of mind Wordsworth appreciated as fully as the opposite, or
complementary one, which finds expression in the great 'Ode, Intimations
of Immortality' (vol. viii.), l. 26.

  'No more shall grief of mine the season wrong,'

and which Browning expresses in other verses of his lyric, and
repeatedly elsewhere. The allusion in the last stanza of this poem is to
Wordsworth's sister Dorothy.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE CHILDLESS FATHER


Composed 1800.-Published 1800 [A]


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. When I was a child at Cockermouth, no
funeral took place without a basin filled with sprigs of boxwood being
placed upon a table covered with a white cloth in front of the house.
The huntings on foot, in which the old man is supposed to join as here
described, were of common, almost habitual, occurrence in our vales when
I was a boy, and the people took much delight in them. They are now less
frequent.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  "Up, Timothy, up with your staff and away!
  Not a soul in the village this morning will stay;
  The hare has just started from Hamilton's grounds,
  And Skiddaw is glad with the cry of the hounds."

--Of coats and of jackets grey, scarlet, and green,               5
  On the slopes of the pastures all colours were seen;
  With their comely blue aprons, and caps white as snow,
  The girls on the hills made a holiday show.

  Fresh sprigs of green box-wood, not six months before,
  Filled the funeral basin [B] at Timothy's door; [1]              10
  A coffin through Timothy's threshold had past;
  One Child [C] did it bear, and that Child was his last.

  Now fast up the dell came the noise and the fray,
  The horse and the horn, and the hark! hark away!
  Old Timothy took up his staff, and he shut                       15
  With a leisurely motion the door of his hut.

  Perhaps to himself at that moment he said;
  "The key I must take, for my Ellen is dead."
  But of this in my ears not a word did he speak;
  And he went to the chase with a tear on his cheek.               20



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  The basin of box-wood, just six months before,
  Had stood on the table at Timothy's door,            1800.

  The basin had offered, just six months before,
  Fresh sprigs of green box-wood at Timothy's door;    1820.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Also in 'The Morning Post', Jan. 30, 1801.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: In several parts of the North of England, when a funeral
takes place, a basin full of Sprigs of Box-wood is placed at the door of
the house from which the Coffin is taken up, and each person who attends
the funeral ordinarily takes a Sprig of this Box-wood, and throws it
into the grave of the deceased.--W. W. 1800.]


[Footnote C: In the list of _errata_, in the edition of 1820 "one child"
is corrected, and made "a child"; but the text remained "one child" in
all subsequent editions.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





SONG FOR THE WANDERING JEW


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


Included among the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  Though the torrents from their fountains
  Roar down many a craggy steep,
  Yet they find among the mountains
  Resting-places calm and deep.

  Clouds that love through air to hasten,                   5
  Ere the storm its fury stills,
  Helmet-like themselves will fasten
  On the heads of towering hills. [1]

  What, if through the frozen centre
  Of the Alps the Chamois bound,                           10
  Yet he has a home to enter
  In some nook of chosen ground: [2]

  And the Sea-horse, though the ocean
  Yield him no domestic cave,
  Slumbers without sense of motion,                        15
  Couched upon the rocking wave. [3]

  If on windy days the Raven
  Gambol like a dancing skiff,
  Not the less she loves her haven [4]
  In [5] the bosom of the cliff. [A]                       20

  The fleet Ostrich, till day closes,
  Vagrant over desert sands,
  Brooding on her eggs reposes
  When chill night that care demands. [6]

  Day and night my toils redouble,                         25
  Never nearer to the goal;
  Night and day, I feel the trouble
  Of the Wanderer in my soul. [7]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1: This stanza was added in the edition of 1827.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Though almost with eagle pinion
  O'er the rocks the Chamois roam,
  Yet he has some small dominion
  Which no doubt he calls his home.    1800.

  Though, as if with eagle pinion
  O'er the rocks the Chamois roam,
  Yet he has some small dominion
  Where he feels himself at home.      1815.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  Though the Sea-horse in the ocean
  Own no dear domestic cave;
  Yet he slumbers without motion
  On the calm and silent wave.     1800.

  Yet he slumbers--by the motion
  Rocked of many a gentle wave.    1827.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  ... he loves his haven    1800.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  On ...    1800.]


[Variant 6: This stanza was added in 1827.]


[Variant 7:

1800.

  Never--never does the trouble
  Of the Wanderer leave my soul.    1815.

The text of 1827 returns to that of 1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In the editions of 1800 to 1832 stanzas 4 and 5 were
transposed. Their present order was adjusted in the edition of
1836.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE BROTHERS [A]


Composed 1800. [B]--Published 1800


[This poem was composed in a grove at the north-eastern end of Grasmere
lake, which grove was in a great measure destroyed by turning the high
road along the side of the water. The few trees that are left were
spared at my intercession. The poem arose out of the fact, mentioned to
me at Ennerdale, that a shepherd had fallen asleep upon the top of the
rock called the Pillar, and perished as here described, his staff being
left midway on the rock.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  These Tourists, heaven preserve us! needs must live
  A profitable life: some glance along,
  Rapid and gay, as if the earth were air,
  And they were butterflies to wheel about
  Long as the [1] summer lasted: some, as wise,                   5
  Perched on the forehead of a jutting crag,
  Pencil in hand and book upon the knee,
  Will look and scribble, scribble on and look, [2]
  Until a man might travel twelve stout miles,
  Or reap an acre of his neighbour's corn.                       10
  But, for that moping Son of Idleness,
  Why can he tarry _yonder_?--In our church-yard
  Is neither epitaph nor monument,
  Tombstone nor name--only the turf we tread
  And a few natural graves."                                     15

                              To Jane, his wife,
  Thus spake the homely Priest of Ennerdale.
  It was a July evening; and he sate
  Upon the long stone-seat beneath the eaves
  Of his old cottage,--as it chanced, that day,                  20
  Employed in winter's work. Upon the stone
  His wife sate near him, teasing matted wool,
  While, from the twin cards toothed with glittering wire,
  He fed the spindle of his youngest child,
  Who, in the open air, with due accord                          25
  Of busy hands and back-and-forward steps,
  Her large round wheel was turning. [3] Towards the field
  In which the Parish Chapel stood alone,
  Girt round with a bare ring of mossy wall,
  While half an hour went by, the Priest had sent                30
  Many a long look of wonder: and at last,
  Risen from his seat, beside the snow white ridge
  Of carded wool which the old man had piled
  He laid his implements with gentle care,
  Each in the other locked; and, down the path                   35
  That [4] from his cottage to the church-yard led,
  He took his way, impatient to accost
  The Stranger, whom he saw still lingering there.

  'Twas one well known to him in former days,
  A Shepherd-lad; who ere his sixteenth year                     40
  Had left that calling, tempted to entrust
  His expectations to the fickle winds
  And perilous waters; with the mariners [5]
  A fellow-mariner;--and so had fared
  Through twenty seasons; but he had been reared                 45
  Among the mountains, and he in his heart
  Was half a shepherd on the stormy seas.
  Oft in the piping shrouds had Leonard heard
  The tones of waterfalls, and inland sounds
  Of caves and trees:--and, when the regular wind                50
  Between the tropics filled the steady sail,
  And blew with the same breath through days and weeks,
  Lengthening invisibly its weary line
  Along the cloudless Main, he, in those hours
  Of tiresome indolence, would often hang                        55
  Over the vessel's side, and gaze and gaze;
  And, while the broad blue [6] wave and sparkling foam
  Flashed round him images and hues that wrought
  In union with the employment of his heart,
  He, thus by feverish passion overcome,                         60
  Even with the organs of his bodily eye,
  Below him, in the bosom of the deep,
  Saw mountains; saw the forms of sheep that grazed
  On verdant hills--with dwellings among trees,
  And shepherds clad in the same country grey                    65
  Which he himself had worn. [C]

                             And now, at last, [7]
  From perils manifold, with some small wealth
  Acquired by traffic 'mid [8] the Indian Isles,
  To his paternal home he is returned,                           70
  With a determined purpose to resume
  The life he had lived there; [9] both for the sake
  Of many darling pleasures, and the love
  Which to an only brother he has borne
  In all his hardships, since that happy time                    75
  When, whether it blew foul or fair, they two
  Were brother-shepherds on their native hills.
--They were the last of all their race: and now,
  When Leonard had approached his home, his heart
  Failed in him; and, not venturing to enquire                   80
  Tidings of one so long and dearly loved, [10]
  He to the solitary church-yard turned; [11]
  That, as he knew in what particular spot
  His family were laid, he thence might learn
  If still his Brother lived, or to the file                     85
  Another grave was added.--He had found
  Another grave,--near which a full half-hour
  He had remained; but, as he gazed, there grew
  Such a confusion in his memory,
  That he began to doubt; and even to hope [12]                  90
  That he had seen this heap of turf before,--
  That it was not another grave; but one
  He had forgotten. He had lost his path,
  As up the vale, that afternoon, he walked [13]
  Through fields which once had been well known to him:          95
  And oh what joy this [14] recollection now
  Sent to his heart! he lifted up his eyes,
  And, looking round, imagined that he saw [15]
  Strange alteration wrought on every side
  Among the woods and fields, and that the rocks,               100
  And everlasting hills [16] themselves were changed.

  By this the Priest, who down the field had come,
  Unseen by Leonard, at the church-yard gate
  Stopped short,--and thence, at leisure, limb by limb
  Perused him [17] with a gay complacency.                      105
  Ay, thought the Vicar, smiling to himself,
  'Tis one of those who needs must leave the path
  Of the world's business to go wild alone:
  His arms have a perpetual holiday;
  The happy man will creep about the fields,                    110
  Following his fancies by the hour, to bring
  Tears down his cheek, [18] or solitary smiles
  Into his face, until the setting sun
  Write fool upon his forehead.--Planted thus
  Beneath a shed that over-arched the gate                      120
  Of this rude church-yard, till the stars appeared
  The good Man might have communed with himself,
  But that the Stranger, who had left the grave,
  Approached; he recognised the Priest at once,
  And, after greetings interchanged, and given                  120
  By Leonard to the Vicar as to one
  Unknown to him, this dialogue ensued.

  _Leonard_. You live, Sir, in these dales, a quiet life:
  Your years make up one peaceful family;
  And who would grieve and fret, if, welcome come               125
  And welcome gone, they are so like each other,
  They cannot be remembered? Scarce a funeral
  Comes to this church-yard once in eighteen months;
  And yet, some changes must take place among you:
  And you, who dwell here, even among these rocks,              130
  Can trace the finger of mortality,
  And see, that with our threescore years and ten
  We are not all that perish.--I remember,
  (For many years ago I passed this road)
  There was a foot-way all along the fields                     135
  By the brook-side--'tis gone--and that dark cleft!
  To me it does not seem to wear the face
  Which then it had!

  _Priest_. Nay, Sir, [19] for aught I know,
  That chasm is much the same--140

  _Leonard_. But, surely, yonder--

  _Priest_. Ay, there, indeed, your memory is a friend
  That does not play you false.--On that tall pike
  (It is the loneliest place of all these hills)
  There were two springs which bubbled side by side, [D]        145
  As if they had been made that they might be
  Companions for each other: the huge crag
  Was rent with lightning--one hath disappeared; [20]
  The other, left behind, is flowing still,
  For accidents and changes such as these,                      150
  We want not store of them; [21]--a water-spout
  Will bring down half a mountain; what a feast
  For folks that wander up and down like you,
  To see an acre's breadth of that wide cliff
  One roaring cataract! a sharp May-storm                       155
  Will come with loads of January snow,
  And in one night send twenty score of sheep
  To feed the ravens; or a shepherd dies
  By some untoward death among the rocks:
  The ice breaks up and sweeps away a bridge;                   160
  A wood is felled:--and then for our own homes!
  A child is born or christened, a field ploughed,
  A daughter sent to service, a web spun,
  The old house-clock is decked with a new face;
  And hence, so far from wanting facts or dates                 165
  To chronicle the time, we all have here
  A pair of diaries,--one serving, Sir,
  For the whole dale, and one for each fire-side--
  Yours was a stranger's judgment: for historians,
  Commend me to these valleys!                                  170

  _Leonard_.             Yet your Church-yard
  Seems, if such freedom may be used with you,
  To say that you are heedless of the past:
  An orphan could not find his mother's grave:
  Here's neither head nor foot-stone, plate of brass,           175
  Cross-bones nor skull,--type of our earthly state
  Nor emblem of our hopes: [22] the dead man's home
  Is but a fellow to that pasture-field.

  _Priest_. Why, there, Sir, is a thought that's new to me!
  The stone-cutters, 'tis true, might beg their bread           180
  If every English church-yard were like ours;
  Yet your conclusion wanders from the truth:
  We have no need of names and epitaphs;
  We talk about the dead by our fire-sides.
  And then, for our immortal part! _we_ want                    185
  No symbols, Sir, to tell us that plain tale:
  The thought of death sits easy on the man
  Who has been born and dies among the mountains. [E]

  _Leonard_. Your Dalesmen, then, do in each other's thoughts
  Possess a kind of second life: no doubt                       190
  You, Sir, could help me to the history
  Of half these graves?

  _Priest_.             For eight-score winters past,
  With what I've witnessed, and with what I've heard,
  Perhaps I might; and, on a winter-evening, [23]               195
  If you were seated at my chimney's nook,
  By turning o'er these hillocks one by one,
  We two could travel, Sir, through a strange round;
  Yet all in the broad highway of the world.
  Now there's a grave--your foot is half upon it,--200
  It looks just like the rest; and yet that man
  Died broken-hearted.

  _Leonard_.           'Tis a common case.
  We'll take another: who is he that lies
  Beneath yon ridge, the last of those three graves?            205
  It touches on that piece of native rock
  Left in the church-yard wall.

  _Priest_.                     That's Walter Ewbank. [F]
  He had as white a head and fresh a cheek
  As ever were produced by youth and age                        210
  Engendering in the blood of hale fourscore.
  Through five [24] long generations had the heart
  Of Walter's forefathers o'erflowed the bounds
  Of their inheritance, that single cottage--
  You see it yonder! and those few green fields.                215
  They toiled and wrought, and still, from sire to son,
  Each struggled, and each yielded as before
  A little--yet a little,--and old Walter,
  They left to him the family heart, and land
  With other burthens than the crop it bore.                    220
  Year after year the old man still kept up [25]
  A cheerful mind,--and buffeted with bond,
  Interest, and mortgages; at last he sank,
  And went into his grave before his time.
  Poor Walter! whether it was care that spurred him             225
  God only knows, but to the very last
  He had the lightest foot in Ennerdale:
  His pace was never that of an old man:
  I almost see him tripping down the path
  With his two grandsons after him:--but you,                   230
  Unless our Landlord be your host to-night,
  Have far to travel,--and on [26] these rough paths
  Even in the longest day of midsummer--

  _Leonard_. But those [27] two Orphans!

  _Priest_.                   Orphans!--Such they were--235
  Yet not while Walter lived:--for, though their parents
  Lay buried side by side as now they lie,
  The old man was a father to the boys,
  Two fathers in one father: and if tears,
  Shed when he talked of them where they were not,              240
  And hauntings from the infirmity of love,
  Are aught of what makes up a mother's heart,
  This old Man, in the day of his old age,
  Was half a mother to them.--If you weep, Sir,
  To hear a stranger talking about strangers,                   245
  Heaven bless you when you are among your kindred!
  Ay--you may turn that way--it is a grave
  Which will bear looking at.

  _Leonard_.                  These boys--I hope
  They loved this good old Man?--250

  _Priest_.                      They did--and truly:
  But that was what we almost overlooked,
  They were such darlings of each other. Yes,
  Though from the cradle they had lived with Walter,
  The only kinsman near them, and though he                     255
  Inclined to both by reason of his age,
  With a more fond, familiar, tenderness;
  They, notwithstanding, had much love to spare, [28]
  And it all went into each other's hearts.
  Leonard, the elder by just eighteen months,                   260
  Was two years taller: 'twas a joy to see,
  To hear, to meet them!--From their house the school
  Is [29] distant three short miles, and in the time
  Of storm and thaw, when every water-course
  And unbridged stream, such as you may have noticed            265
  Crossing our roads at every hundred steps,
  Was swoln into a noisy rivulet
  Would Leonard then, when elder boys remained
  At home, go staggering through the slippery fords, [30]
  Bearing his brother on his back. I have [31] seen him,        270
  On windy days, in one of those stray brooks,
  Ay, more than once I have [31] seen him, mid-leg deep,
  Their two books lying both on a dry stone,
  Upon the hither side: and once I said,
  As I remember, looking round these rocks                      275
  And hills on which we all of us were born,
  That God who made the great book of the world
  Would bless such piety--

  _Leonard_.              It may be then--

  _Priest_. Never did worthier lads break English bread;        280
  The very brightest Sunday Autumn saw [32]
  With all its mealy clusters of ripe nuts,
  Could never keep those [33] boys away from church,
  Or tempt them to an hour of sabbath breach.
  Leonard and James! I warrant, every corner                    285
  Among these rocks, and every hollow place
  That venturous foot could reach, to one or both [34]
  Was known as well as to the flowers that grow there.
  Like roe-bucks they went bounding o'er the hills;
  They played like two young ravens on the crags:               290
  Then they could write, ay and speak too, as well
  As many of their betters--and for Leonard!
  The very night before he went away,
  In my own house I put into his hand
  A bible, and I'd wager house and field                        295
  That, if he be alive, he has it yet. [35]

  _Leonard_. It seems, these Brothers have not lived to be
  A comfort to each other--

  _Priest_.           That they might
  Live to such end [36] is what both old and young              300
  In this our valley all of us have wished,
  And what, for my part, I have often prayed:
  But Leonard--

  _Leonard_.     Then James still is left among you!

  _Priest_. 'Tis of the elder brother I am speaking:            305
  They had an uncle;--he was at that time
  A thriving man, and trafficked on the seas:
  And, but for that [37] same uncle, to this hour
  Leonard had never handled rope or shroud:
  For the boy loved the life which we lead here;                310
  And though of unripe years, a stripling only, [38]
  His soul was knit to this his native soil.
  But, as I said, old Walter was too weak
  To strive with such a torrent; when he died,
  The estate and house were sold; and all their sheep,          315
  A pretty flock, and which, for aught I know,
  Had clothed the Ewbanks for a thousand years:--
  Well--all was gone, and they were destitute,
  And Leonard, chiefly for his Brother's sake,
  Resolved to try his fortune on the seas.                      320
  Twelve years are past [39] since we had tidings from him.
  If there were [40] one among us who had heard
  That Leonard Ewbank was come home again,
  From the Great Gavel, [G] down by Leeza's banks,
  And down the Enna, far as Egremont.                           325
  The day would be a joyous festival; [41]
  And those two bells of ours, which there you see--
  Hanging in the open air--but, O good Sir!
  This is sad talk--they'll never sound for him--
  Living or dead.--When last we heard of him,                   330
  He was in slavery among the Moors
  Upon the Barbary coast.--'Twas not a little
  That would bring down his spirit; and no doubt,
  Before it ended in his death, the Youth [42]
  Was sadly crossed.--Poor Leonard! when we parted,             335
  He took me by the hand, and said to me,
  If e'er he should grow rich, he would return,
  To live in peace upon his father's land,
  And lay his bones among us. [43]

  _Leonard_.             If that day                            340
  Should come, 'twould needs be a glad day for him;
  He would himself, no doubt, be happy then
  As any that should meet him--

  _Priest_.                Happy! Sir--

  _Leonard_. You said his kindred all were in their graves,     345
  And that he had one Brother--

  _Priest_.               That is but
  A fellow-tale of sorrow. From his youth
  James, though not sickly, yet was delicate;
  And Leonard being always by his side                          350
  Had done so many offices about him,
  That, though he was not of a timid nature,
  Yet still the spirit of a mountain-boy
  In him was somewhat checked; and, when his Brother
  Was gone to sea, and he was left alone,                       355
  The little colour that he had was soon
  Stolen from his cheek; he drooped, and pined, and pined--

  _Leonard_. But these are all the graves of full-grown men!

  _Priest_. Ay, Sir, that passed away: we took him to us;
  He was the child of all the dale--he lived                    360
  Three months with one, and six months with another;
  And wanted neither food, nor clothes, nor love:
  And many, many happy days were his.
  But, whether blithe or sad, 'tis my belief
  His absent Brother still was at his heart.                    365
  And, when he dwelt [44] beneath our roof, we found
  (A practice till this time unknown to him)
  That often, rising from his bed at night,
  He in his sleep would walk about, and sleeping
  He sought his brother Leonard.--You are moved!                370
  Forgive me, Sir: before I spoke to you,
  I judged you most unkindly.

  _Leonard_.             But this Youth,
  How did he die at last?

  _Priest_.          One sweet May-morning,                     375
  (It will be twelve years since when Spring returns)
  He had gone forth among the new-dropped lambs,
  With two or three companions, whom their course
  Of occupation led from height to height
  Under a cloudless sun--till he, at length,                    380
  Through weariness, or, haply, to indulge
  The humour of the moment, lagged behind. [45]
  You see yon precipice;--it wears the shape
  Of a vast building made of many crags; [46]
  And in the midst is one particular rock                       385
  That rises like a column from the vale,
  Whence by our shepherds it is called, THE PILLAR.
  Upon its aery summit crowned with heath,
  The loiterer, not unnoticed by his comrades,
  Lay stretched at ease; but, passing by the place              390
  On their return, they found that he was gone.
  No ill was feared; till one of them by chance
  Entering, when evening was far spent, the house
  Which at that time was James's home, there learned [47]
  That nobody had seen him all that day: [H]                    395
  The morning came, and still he was unheard of:
  The neighbours were alarmed, and to the brook
  Some hastened; some ran to the lake: [48] ere noon
  They found him at the foot of that same rock
  Dead, and with mangled limbs. The third day after             400
  I buried him, poor Youth, [49] and there he lies!

  _Leonard_. And that then _is_ his grave!--Before his death
  You say [50] that he saw many happy years?

  _Priest_. Ay, that he did--

  _Leonard_.                 And all went well with him?--405

  _Priest_. If he had one, the Youth [51] had twenty homes.

  _Leonard_. And you believe, then, that his mind was easy?--

  _Priest_. Yes, long before he died, he found that time
  Is a true friend to sorrow; and unless
  His thoughts were turned on Leonard's luckless fortune,       410
  He talked about him with a cheerful love.

  _Leonard_. He could not come to an unhallowed end!

  _Priest_. Nay, God forbid!--You recollect I mentioned
  A habit which disquietude and grief
  Had brought upon him; and we all conjectured                  415
  That, as the day was warm, he had lain down
  On the soft heath, [52] and, waiting for his comrades,
  He there had fallen asleep; that in his sleep
  He to the margin of the precipice
  Had walked, and from the summit had fallen headlong:          420
  And so no doubt he perished. When the Youth
  Fell, in his hand he must have grasp'd, we think, [53]
  His shepherd's staff; for on that Pillar of rock
  It had been caught mid way; and there for years [54]
  It hung;--and mouldered there.                                425

                                 The Priest here ended--
  The Stranger would have thanked him, but he felt
  A gushing from his heart, that took away
  The power of speech. Both left the spot in silence; [55]
  And Leonard, when they reached the church-yard gate,          430
  As the Priest lifted up the latch, turned round,--
  And, looking at the grave, he said, "My Brother!"
  The Vicar did not hear the words: and now,
  He pointed towards his dwelling-place, entreating [56]
  That Leonard would partake his homely fare:                   435
  The other thanked him with an earnest [57] voice;
  But added, that, the evening being calm,
  He would pursue his journey. So they parted.

  It was not long ere Leonard reached a grove
  That overhung the road: he there stopped short,               440
  And, sitting down beneath the trees, reviewed
  All that the Priest had said: his early years
  Were with him:--his long absence, cherished hopes, [58]
  And thoughts which had been his an hour before,
  All pressed on him with such a weight, that now,              445
  This vale, where he had been so happy, seemed
  A place in which he could not bear to live:
  So he relinquished all his purposes.
  He travelled back [59] to Egremont: and thence,
  That night, he wrote a letter to the Priest, [60]             450
  Reminding him of what had passed between them;
  And adding, with a hope to be forgiven,
  That it was from the weakness of his heart
  He had not dared to tell him who he was.
  This done, he went on shipboard, and is now                   455
  A Seaman, a grey-headed Mariner.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  ... their ...    1800.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Upon the forehead of a jutting crag
  Sit perch'd with book and pencil on their knee,
  And look and scribble, ...     1800.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  ... youngest child,
  Who turn'd her large round wheel in the open air
  With back and forward steps....    1800.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  Which ...    1800.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  ... who ere his thirteenth year
  Had chang'd his calling, with the mariners    1800.]


[Variant 6:

1840.

  ... green ...    1800.]


[Variant 7:

1815.

  ... at length, ...    1800.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

  ... traffic in ...    1800.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

  ... which he liv'd there, ...    1800.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  ... of one whom he so dearly lov'd,    1800.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

  Towards the church-yard he had turn'd aside,    1800.]


[Variant 12:

1836.

  ... and he had hopes    1800.

  ... and hope was his    1832.]


[Variant 13:

1815.

  As up the vale he came that afternoon,    1800.]


[Variant 14:

1836.

  ... the ...    1800.]


[Variant 15:

1815.

  ... he thought that he perceiv'd     1800.]


[Variant 16:

1827.

  And the eternal hills, ...        1800.

  And the everlasting hills, ...    1820.]


[Variant 17:

1815.

  He scann'd him ...     1800.]


[Variant 18:

1800.

  ... cheeks, ...     1802.

The text of 1827 returns to that of 1800.]


[Variant 19:

1815.

  Why, Sir, ...      1800.]


[Variant 20:

1827.

  Companions for each other: ten years back,
  Close to those brother fountains, the huge crag
  Was rent with lightning--one is dead and gone,      1800.]


[Variant 21:

1815.

  Why we have store of them! ...     1800.]


[Variant 22:

1815.

  Cross-bones or skull, type of our earthly state
  Or emblem of our hopes: ...     1800.]


[Variant 23:

1827.

  ... winter's evening,    1800.]


[Variant 24:

1815.

  For five ...    1800.]


[Variant 25:

1802.

  ... still preserv'd    1800.]


[Variant 26:

1815.

  ... in ...    1800.]


[Variant 27:

1815.

  ... these ...    1800.]


[Variant 28:

1836.

  ... For
  Though from their cradles they had liv'd with Walter,
  The only kinsman near them in the house,
  Yet he being old, they had much love to spare,    1800.

  The only Kinsman near them, and though he
  Inclined to them, by reason of his age,
  With a more fond, familiar tenderness,
  They, notwithstanding, had much love to spare,    1815.]


[Variant 29:

1820.

  Was ...    1800.]


[Variant 30:

1836.

  ... when elder boys perhaps
  Remain'd at home, go staggering through the fords    1800.]


[Variant 31:

1832.

  ... I've ...    1800.]


[Variant 32:

1836.

  The finest Sunday that the Autumn saw,      1800.]


[Variant 33:

1836.

  ... these ....      1800.]


[Variant 34:

1836.

  Where foot could come, to one or both of them      1800.]


[Variant 35:

1836.

  ... and I'd wager twenty pounds,
  That, if he is alive, ...              1800.

  ... and I'd wager house and field      1827.]


[Variant 36:

1815.

  ... that end, ...     1800.]


[Variant 37:

1815.

  ... this ...     1800.]


[Variant 38:

1815.

  And, though a very Stripling, twelve years old;      1800.]


[Variant 39:

1827.

  'Tis now twelve years ...      1800.]


[Variant 40:

1820.

  ... was ...     1800.]


[Variant 41:

1836.

  ... a very festival,     1800.]


[Variant 42:

1815.

  ... the Lad     1800.]


[Variant 43.

1832.

  If ever the day came when he was rich,
  He would return, and on his Father's Land
  He would grow old among us.     1800.]


[Variant 44:

1827.

  ... liv'd ...     1800.]


[Variant 45:

1820.

  With two or three companions whom it chanc'd
  Some further business summon'd to a house
  Which stands at the Dale-head. James, tir'd perhaps,
  Or from some other cause remain'd behind.     1800.]


[Variant 46:

  ... it almost looks
  Like some vast building ...     1800.]


[Variant 47:

1827.

  ... it is called, _The Pillar_.
  James pointed to its summit, over which
  They all had purpos'd to return together,
  And told them that he there would wait for them:
  They parted, and his comrades pass'd that way
  Some two hours after, but they did not find him
  At the appointed place, a circumstance
  Of which they took no heed: but one of them,
  Going by chance, at night, into the house
  Which at this time was James's home, ...         1800.

  ... but they did not find him
  Upon the Pillar--at the appointed place.
  Of this they took no heed: ...                   1802.

  Which at that time ...                           1802.

  Upon the Summit--at the appointed place.         1815.

  ... they found that he was gone.
  From this no ill was feared; but one of them,
  Entering by chance, at even-tide, the house      1820.

In all else the edition of 1820 is identical with the final text of
1827.]


[Variant 48:

1836.

  Some went, and some towards the Lake; ...      1800.

  Some hastened, some towards the Lake: ...      1820.]


[Variant 49:

1815.

  ... Lad ...       1800.]


[Variant 50:

1820.

  ... said ...       1800.]


[Variant 51:

1815.

  ... Lad ...        1800.]


[Variant 52:

1836.

  Upon the grass, ...       1800.]


[Variant 53:

1836.

  ... he perish'd: at the time,
  We guess, that in his hands he must have had     1800.

  must have held                                   1827.]


[Variant 54:

1836.

  ... for midway in the cliff
  It had been caught, and there for many years     1800.]


[Variant 55:

1815.

  ... but he felt
  Tears rushing in; both left the spot in silence,     1800.]


[Variant 56:

1836.

  Pointing towards the Cottage, he entreated      1800.]


[Variant 57:

1836.

  ... fervent    1800.]


[Variant 58:

1836.

  Were with him in his heart: his cherish'd hopes,     1800.]


[Variant 59:

1836.

  ... travell'd on ...    1800.]


[Variant 60:

1802.

  That night, address'd a letter to the Priest      1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This Poem was intended to be the concluding poem of a
series of pastorals, the scene of which was laid among the mountains of
Cumberland and Westmoreland. I mention this to apologise for the
abruptness with which the poem begins.--W. W. 1800.]


[Footnote B: In Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal the following
entry occurs:

  "Friday, 6th August (1800).--In the morning I copied 'The Brothers'."

Ed.]


[Footnote C: This description of the Calenture is sketched from an
imperfect recollection of an admirable one in prose, by Mr. Gilbert,
Author of 'The Hurricane'.--W. W. 1800.

Compare another reference to 'The Hurricane; a Theosophical and Western
Eclogue' etc., by William Gilbert, in one of the notes to 'The
Excursion', book iii. l. 931.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: The impressive circumstance here described, actually took
place some years ago in this country, upon an eminence called Kidstow
Pike, one of the highest of the mountains that surround Hawes-water. The
summit of the pike was stricken by lightning; and every trace of one of
the fountains disappeared, while the other continued to flow as
before.--W. W. 1800.]


[Footnote E: There is not any thing more worthy of remark in the manners
of the inhabitants of these mountains, than the tranquillity, I might
say indifference, with which they think and talk upon the subject of
death. Some of the country church-yards, as here described, do not
contain a single tomb-stone, and most of them have a very small
number.--W. W. 1800.]


[Footnote F: The name in the original MS. was "Wilfred Evans."--Ed.]


[Footnote G: The great Gavel, so called I imagine, from its resemblance
to the Gable end of a house, is one of the highest of the Cumberland
mountains. It stands at the head of the several vales of Ennerdale,
Wastdale, and Borrowdale.

The Leeza is a River which flows into the Lake of Ennerdale: on issuing
from the Lake, it changes its name, and is called the End, Eyne, or
Enna. It falls into the sea a little below Egremont--W. W. 1800.]


[Footnote H: See Coleridge's criticism of these lines in a note to
chapter xviii. of 'Biographia Literaria' (vol. ii. p. 83 of the edition
of 1817).--Ed.]



This poem illustrates the way in which Wordsworth's imagination worked
upon a minimum of fact, idealizing a simple story, and adding

                               'the gleam,
  The light that never was, on sea or land,
  The consecration, and the Poet's dream.'

It is the only poem of his referring to Ennerdale; but perhaps the chief
association with that dale, to those who visit it after becoming
acquainted with this poem, will be the fact that the brothers Ewbank
were supposed to have spent their youth under the shadow of the Pillar,
and Leonard to have had this conversation, on his return from sea, with
the venerable priest of Ennerdale. The district is described with all
that local accuracy which Wordsworth invariably showed in idealization.
The height whence James Ewbank is supposed to have fallen is not the
Pillar-Rock--a crag somewhat difficult to ascend, except by practised
climbers, and which has only been accessible since mountaineering became
an art and a passion to Englishmen. But, if we suppose the conversation
with the priest of Ennerdale to have taken place at the Bridge, below
the Lake--as that is the only place where there is both a hamlet and "a
churchyard"--the "precipice" will refer to the Pillar "Mountain." Both
are alluded to in the poem. The lines,

  'You see yon precipice;--it wears the shape
  Of a vast building made of many crags;
  And in the midst is one particular rock
  That rises like a column from the vale,
  Whence by our shepherds it is called, _The Pillar_,'

are definite enough. The great mass of the Pillar Mountain is first
referred to, and then the Rock which is a characteristic spur, halfway
up the mountain on its northern side. The "aery summit crowned with
heath," however, on which "the loiterer" "lay stretched at ease," could
neither be the top of this "rock" nor the summit of the "mountain": not
the former, because there is no heath on it, and it would be impossible
for a weary man, loitering behind his companions, to ascend it to rest;
not the latter, because no one resting on the summit of the mountain
could be "not unnoticed by his comrades," and they would not pass that
way over the top of the mountain "on their return" to Ennerdale. This is
an instance, therefore, in which precise localization is impossible.
Probably Wordsworth did not know either that the pillar "rock" was bare
on the summit, or that it had never been ascended in 1800; and he
idealised it to suit his imaginative purpose. In connection with this
poem, a remark he made to the Hon. Mr. Justice Coleridge may be
recalled.

  "He said there was some foundation in fact, however slight, for every
  poem he had written of a narrative kind; ... 'The Brothers' was
  founded on a young shepherd, in his sleep, having fallen down a crag,
  his staff remaining suspended mid-way."

(See the 'Memoirs of Wordsworth', by the late Bishop of Lincoln, vol.
ii. p. 305.) It should be added that the character of Leonard Ewbank was
drawn in large part from that of the poet's brother John--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE SEVEN SISTERS; OR, THE SOLITUDE OF BINNORIE [A]


Composed 1800. [B]--Published 1807


The Story of this Poem is from the German of Frederica Brun. [C]--W. W.
1807.

One of the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  I       Seven Daughters had Lord Archibald,
          All children of one mother:
          You could [1] not say in one short day
          What love they bore each other.
          A garland, of seven lilies, wrought!                    5
          Seven Sisters that together dwell;
          But he, bold Knight as ever fought,
          Their Father, took of them no thought,
          He loved the wars so well.
          Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,                      10
          The solitude of Binnorie!

  II      Fresh blows the wind, a western wind,
          And from the shores of Erin,
          Across the wave, a Rover brave
          To Binnorie is steering:                               15
          Right onward to the Scottish strand
          The gallant ship is borne;
          The warriors leap upon the land,
          And hark! the Leader of the band
          Hath blown his bugle horn.                             20
          Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,
          The solitude of Binnorie.

  III     Beside a grotto of their own,
          With boughs above them closing,
          The Seven are laid, and in the shade                   25
          They lie like fawns reposing.
          But now, upstarting with affright
          At noise of man and steed,
          Away they fly to left, to right--
          Of your fair household, Father-knight,                 30
          Methinks you take small heed!
          Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,
          The solitude of Binnorie.

  IV      Away the seven fair Campbells fly,
          And, over hill and hollow,                             35
          With menace proud, and insult loud,
          The youthful Rovers [2] follow.
          Cried they, "Your Father loves to roam:
          Enough for him to find
          The empty house when he comes home;                    40
          For us your yellow ringlets comb,
          For us be fair and kind!"
          Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,
          The solitude of Binnorie.

  V       Some close behind, some side by side,                  45
          Like clouds in stormy weather;
          They run, and cry, "Nay, let us die,
          And let us die together."
          A lake was near; the shore was steep;
          There never foot had been;                             50
          They ran, and with a desperate leap
          Together plunged into the deep, [3]
          Nor ever more were seen.
          Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,
          The solitude of Binnorie.                              55

  VI      The stream that flows out of the lake,
          As through the glen it rambles,
          Repeats a moan o'er moss and stone,
          For those seven lovely Campbells.
          Seven little Islands, green and bare,                  60
          Have risen from out the deep:
          The fishers say, those sisters fair,
          By faeries all are buried there,
          And there together sleep.
          Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,                      65
          The solitude of Binnorie.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  I could ...     1807.]


[Variant 2:

1807.

  The Irish Rovers ...     MS.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  The sisters ran like mountain sheep    MS.

  And in together did they leap          MS.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: It is a well-known Scottish Ballad. In Jamieson's 'Popular
Ballads', vol. i. p. 50 (1806), its title is "The Twa Sisters." In
Walter Scott's 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border', vol. iii. p. 287, it
is called "The Cruel Sisters." In 'The Ballads of Scotland', collected
by W. Edmonstone Aytoun (1858), vol. i. p. 194, it is printed
"Binnorie." In 1807 Wordsworth printed the sub-title 'The Solitude of
Binnorie'.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: In Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal there is an entry,
under date August 16, 1800,

  "William read us 'The Seven Sisters'."

It is uncertain whether this refers to his own poem or not, but I
incline to think it does.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: In a MS. copy this note runs thus:

  "This poem, in the groundwork of the story, is from the German of
  Frederica Brun."

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





RURAL ARCHITECTURE


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. These structures, as every one knows,
are common amongst our hills, being built by shepherds, as conspicuous
marks, and occasionally by boys in sport.--I. F.]

Included among the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.




  There's George Fisher, Charles Fleming, and Reginald Shore, [1]
  Three rosy-cheeked school-boys, the highest not more
  Than the height of a counsellor's bag;
  To the top of GREAT HOW [A] did it please them to climb: [2]
  And there they built up, without mortar or lime,                     5
  A Man on the peak of the crag.

  They built him of stones gathered up as they lay:
  They built him and christened him all in one day,
  An urchin both vigorous and hale;
  And so without scruple they called him Ralph Jones.                 10
  Now Ralph is renowned for the length of his bones;
  The Magog of Legberthwaite dale.

  Just half a week after, the wind sallied forth,
  And, in anger or merriment, out of the north,
  Coming on with a terrible pother,                                   15
  From the peak of the crag blew the giant away.
  And what did these school-boys?--The very next day
  They went and they built up another.

--Some little I've seen of blind boisterous works
  By Christian disturbers more savage than Turks, [3]                 20
  Spirits busy to do and undo:
  At remembrance whereof my blood sometimes will flag;
  Then, light-hearted Boys, to the top of the crag;
  And I'll build up a giant with you. [4]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1800.

  From the meadows of ARMATH, on THIRLMERE'S wild shore,     1827.

The text of 1832 reverts to that of 1800.]


[Variant 2:

1800.

  ... were once tempted to climb;     1827

The text of 1832 reverts to that of 1800.]


[Variant 3:

1820.

  In Paris and London, 'mong Christians or Turks,     1800]


[Variant 4: This last stanza was omitted from the editions of 1805 and
1815. It was restored in 1820.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Great How is a single and conspicuous hill, which rises
towards the foot of Thirl-mere, on the western side of the beautiful
dale of Legberthwaite, along the high road between Keswick and
Ambleside.--W. W. 1800.]







The editions of 1836, 1840, 1841, 1842, 1843, and 1845, and the Fenwick
note, assign this poem to the year 1801. It must, however, have been
composed during the previous year, because it was published in the
"Lyrical Ballads" of 1800. The locality referred to--which is also
associated with 'The Waggoner'--is easily identified.

In a letter to Wordsworth, written in the year 1815, Charles Lamb said:
"How I can be brought in, _felo de omittendo_, for that ending to the
Boy-builders is a mystery. I can't say positively now, I only know that
no line oftener or readier occurs than that 'Light-hearted boys, I will
build up a Giant with you.' It comes naturally, with a warm holiday, and
the freshness of the blood. It is a perfect summer amulet, that I tie
round my legs to quicken their motion when I go out a maying." (See
_Letters of Charles Lamb_, edited by Alfred Ainger, vol. i. p.
287.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





A CHARACTER


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[The principal features are taken from my friend Robert Jones.--I. F.]

Included among the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.




  I marvel how Nature could ever find space
  For so many strange contrasts in one human face: [1]
  There's thought and no thought, and there's paleness and bloom
  And bustle and sluggishness, pleasure and gloom.

  There's weakness, and strength both redundant and vain;             5
  Such strength as, if ever affliction and pain
  Could pierce through a temper that's soft to disease,
  Would be rational peace--a philosopher's ease.

  There's indifference, alike when he fails or [2] succeeds,
  And attention full ten times as much as there needs;               10
  Pride where there's no envy, there's so much of joy;
  And mildness, and spirit both forward and coy.

  There's freedom, and sometimes a diffident stare
  Of shame scarcely seeming to know that she's there,
  There's virtue, the title it surely may claim,                     15
  Yet wants heaven knows what to be worthy the name.

  This picture from nature may seem to depart, [3]
  Yet the Man would at once run away with your heart;
  And I for five centuries right gladly would be
  Such an odd such a kind happy creature as he.                      20



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  For the weight and the levity seen in his face:    1800.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  ... and ...    1800.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  What a picture! 'tis drawn without nature or art,    1800.]


The full title of this poem, in "Lyrical Ballads," 1800, is 'A
Character, in the antithetical Manner'. It was omitted from all
subsequent editions till 1837. With this early friend, Robert Jones--a
fellow collegian at St. John's College, Cambridge--Wordsworth visited
the Continent (France and Switzerland), during the long vacation of
1790; and to him he dedicated the first edition of 'Descriptive
Sketches', in 1793. With him he also made a pedestrian tour in Wales in
1791. Jones afterwards became the incumbent of Soulderne, near
Deddington, in Oxfordshire; and Wordsworth described his parsonage there
in the sonnet, beginning "Where holy ground begins, unhallowed ends."
(See Wordsworth's note to the sonnet 'Composed near Calais', p.
333.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





INSCRIPTION FOR THE SPOT WHERE THE HERMITAGE STOOD ON ST. HERBERT'S
ISLAND, DERWENT-WATER


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


Included in 1815 among the "Poems referring to the Period of Old Age,"
and in all subsequent editions among the "Inscriptions."--Ed.




  If thou in the dear love of some one Friend
  Hast been so happy that thou know'st what thoughts
  Will sometimes in the happiness of love
  Make the heart sink, [A] then wilt thou reverence
  This quiet spot; and, Stranger! not unmoved                       5
  Wilt thou behold this shapeless heap of stones,
  The desolate ruins of St. Herbert's Cell.
  Here stood his threshold; here was spread the roof
  That sheltered him, a self-secluded Man,
  After long exercise in social cares                              10
  And offices humane, intent to adore
  The Deity, with undistracted mind,
  And meditate on everlasting things,
  In utter solitude.--But he had left
  A Fellow-labourer, whom the good Man loved                       15
  As his own soul. And, when with eye upraised
  To heaven he knelt before the crucifix,
  While o'er the lake the cataract of Lodore
  Pealed to his orisons, and when he paced
  Along the beach of this small isle and thought                   20
  Of his Companion, he would pray that both
  (Now that their earthly duties were fulfilled)
  Might die in the same moment. Nor in vain
  So prayed he:--as our chronicles report,
  Though here the Hermit numbered his last day                     25
  Far from St. Cuthbert his beloved Friend,
  Those holy Men both died in the same hour. [1]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANT ON THE TEXT


[Variant 1:

1832.

The text of this poem underwent so many changes, which are not easily
shown by the plan adopted throughout this edition--portions of the
earliest version of 1800 being abandoned and again adopted, and the
whole arrangement of the passages being altered--that it seems desirable
to append the entire text of 1800, and extensive parts of that of
subsequent years. The final text of 1832 is printed above.


  If thou in the dear love of some one friend
  Hast been so happy, that thou know'st what thoughts
  Will, sometimes, in the happiness of love
  Make the heart sink, then wilt thou reverence
  This quiet spot.--St. Herbert hither came
  And here, for many seasons, from the world
  Remov'd, and the affections of the world
  He dwelt in solitude. He living here,
  This island's sole inhabitant! had left
  A Fellow-labourer, whom the good Man lov'd
  As his own soul; and when within his cave
  Alone he knelt before the crucifix
  While o'er the lake the cataract of Lodore
  Peal'd to his orisons, and when he pac'd
  Along the beach of this small isle and thought
  Of his Companion, he had pray'd that both
  Might die in the same moment. Nor in vain
  So pray'd he:--as our Chronicles report,
  Though here the Hermit number'd his last days,
  Far from St. Cuthbert his beloved friend,
  Those holy men both died in the same hour.    1800.

The text of the editions of 1802 and 1805 (which are identical), omits
one line of the text of 1800. The passage reads:

  He dwelt in solitude.--But he had left
  A Fellow-labourer, whom ...

And the following variants occur in 1802 and 1805:

  Make the heart sick, ....

  ... he would pray that both

The text of 1815, which is continued in 1820, begins thus:

  This Island, guarded from profane approach
  By mountains high and waters widely spread,
  Is that recess to which St. Herbert came
  In life's decline; a self-secluded Man,
  After long exercise in social cares
  And offices humane, intent to adore
  The Deity, with undistracted mind,
  And meditate on everlasting things.
--Stranger! this shapeless heap of stones and earth
  (Long be its mossy covering undisturbed!)
  Is reverenced as a vestige of the Abode
  In which, through many seasons, from the world
  Removed, and the affections of the world,
  He dwelt in solitude.--But he had left
  A Fellow-labourer, ...    1815 and 1820.

In 1827 the poem began thus:

  Stranger! this shapeless heap of stones and earth
  Is the last relic of St. Herbert's Cell.
  Here stood his threshold; here was spread the roof
  That sheltered him, a self-secluded Man,    1827.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare the last stanza of "Strange fits of passion have I
known," p. 79 of this volume.--Ed.]



The "shapeless heap of stones" in St. Herbert's Island, which were
"desolate ruins" in 1800, are even more "shapeless" and "desolate" now,
but they can easily be identified. The island is near the centre of the
lake, and is in area about four acres. The legend of St. Herbert dates
from the middle of the seventh century. The rector of Clifton,
Westmoreland, Dr. Robinson, writing in 1819, says:

  "The remains of his hermitage are still visible, being built of stone
  and mortar, and formed into two apartments, one of which, about twenty
  feet long and sixteen feet wide, seems to have been his chapel; the
  other, of less dimensions, his cell. Near these ruins the late Sir
  Wilfred Lawson (to whose representative the island at present belongs)
  erected some years ago a small octagonal cottage, which, being built
  of unhewn stone, and artificially mossed over, has a venerable
  appearance."

(See _Guide to the Lakes_, by John Robinson, D.D., 1819). This cottage
has now disappeared. The following version of this "Inscription" occurs
in a letter from Wordsworth to Lady Beaumont, dated 26th November 1811:

  This Island, guarded from profane approach
  By mountains high and waters widely spread,
  Gave to St. Herbert a benign retreat.
  Upon a staff supported, and his Brow
  White with the peaceful diadem of age.
  Hither he came--a self-secluded Man,
  ...
  Behold that shapeless Heap of stones and earth!
  "Tis reverenced as a Vestige of the Abode
  ...
  ...--And when within his Cell
  Alone he knelt before the crucifix,

In a previous letter to Sir George Beaumont, dated 16th November 1811:

  By mountains high and waters widely spread,
  Is that Seclusion which St. Herbert chose;
  ...
  Hither he came in life's austere decline:
  And, Stranger! this blank Heap of stones and earth
  Is reverenced ...

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





WRITTEN WITH A PENCIL UPON A STONE IN THE WALL OF THE HOUSE (AN
OUT-HOUSE), ON THE ISLAND AT GRASMERE [A]


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


Included among the "Inscriptions."--Ed.




  Rude is this Edifice, and Thou hast seen
  Buildings, albeit rude, that have maintained
  Proportions more harmonious, and approached
  To closer fellowship with ideal grace.
  But take it in good part:--alas! the poor [1]                   5
  Vitruvius of our village had no help
  From the great City; never, upon leaves [2]
  Of red Morocco folio saw displayed,
  In long succession, pre-existing ghosts [3]
  Of Beauties yet unborn--the rustic Lodge                       10
  Antique, and Cottage with verandah graced,
  Nor lacking, for fit company, alcove,
  Green-house, shell-grot, and moss-lined hermitage. [4]
  Thou see'st a homely Pile, [5] yet to these walls
  The heifer comes in the snow-storm, and here                   15
  The new-dropped lamb finds shelter from the wind.
  And hither does one Poet sometimes row
  His pinnace, a small vagrant barge, up-piled
  With plenteous store of heath and withered fern,
  (A lading which he with his sickle cuts,                       20
  Among the mountains) and beneath this roof
  He makes his summer couch, and here at noon
  Spreads out his limbs, while, yet unshorn, the Sheep,
  Panting beneath the burthen of their wool,
  Lie round him, even as if they were a part                     25
  Of his own Household: nor, while from his bed
  He looks, through the open door-place, [6] toward the lake
  And to the stirring breezes, does he want
  Creations lovely as the work of sleep--
  Fair sights, and visions of romantic joy!                      30



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  ... and approach'd
  To somewhat of a closer fellowship
  With the ideal grace. Yet as it is
  Do take it in good part; for he, the poor    1800.

  ... alas! the poor                           1815.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  ... on the leaves       1800.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  The skeletons and pre-existing ghosts      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1837.

  ... yet unborn, the rustic Box,
  Snug Cot, with Coach-house, Shed and Hermitage.     1800.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  It is a homely pile, ...       1800.]


[Variant 6:

1837.

  He through that door-place looks ...      1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT



[Footnote A: The title of this poem in the edition of 1800 was simply
'Inscription for the House (an Out-house) on the Island at
Grasmere'.--Ed.]


This "homely pile" on the island of Grasmere--very homely--still
remains.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





MICHAEL

A PASTORAL POEM [A]


Composed 1800.--Published 1800


[Written at the Town-end, Grasmere, about the same time as 'The
Brothers'. The sheepfold, on which so much of the poem turns, remains,
or rather the ruins of it. The character and circumstances of Luke were
taken from a family to whom had belonged, many years before, the house
we lived in at Town-end, along with some fields and woodlands on the
eastern shore of Grasmere. The name of the Evening Star was not in fact
given to this house, but to another on the same side of the valley, more
to the north.--I.F.]

Included among the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  If from the public way you turn your steps
  Up the tumultuous brook of Green-head Ghyll,
  You will suppose that with an upright path
  Your feet must struggle; in such bold ascent
  The pastoral mountains front you, face to face.                     5
  But, courage! for around [1] that boisterous brook
  The mountains have all opened out themselves,
  And made a hidden valley of their own.
  No habitation can be seen; but they
  Who journey thither find themselves alone [2]                      10
  With a few sheep, with rocks and stones, and kites
  That overhead are sailing in the sky.
  It is in truth an utter solitude;
  Nor should I have made mention of this Dell
  But for one object which you might pass by,                        15
  Might see and notice not. Beside the brook
  Appears [3] a straggling heap of unhewn stones!
  And to that simple object appertains
  A story--unenriched with strange events,
  Yet not unfit, I deem, for the fireside, [4]                       20
  Or for the summer shade. It was the first
  Of those domestic tales that spake to me [5]
  Of Shepherds, dwellers in the valleys, men
  Whom I already loved;--not verily
  For their own sakes, but for the fields and hills                  25
  Where was their occupation and abode.
  And hence this Tale, while I was yet a Boy
  Careless of books, yet having felt the power
  Of Nature, by the gentle agency
  Of natural objects, led me on to feel                              30
  For passions that were not my own, and think
  (At random and imperfectly indeed)
  On man, the heart of man, and human life.
  Therefore, although it be a history
  Homely and rude, I will relate the same                            35
  For the delight of a few natural hearts;
  And, with yet fonder feeling, for the sake
  Of youthful Poets, who among these hills
  Will be my second self when I am gone.

    Upon the forest-side in Grasmere Vale                            40
  There dwelt a Shepherd, Michael was his name;
  An old man, stout of heart, and strong of limb.
  His bodily frame had been from youth to age
  Of an unusual strength: his mind was keen,
  Intense, and frugal, apt for all affairs,                          45
  And in his shepherd's calling he was prompt
  And watchful more than ordinary men.
  Hence had he learned [6] the meaning of all winds,
  Of blasts of every tone; and, oftentimes,
  When others heeded not, He heard the South                         50
  Make subterraneous music, like the noise
  Of bagpipers on distant Highland hills.
  The Shepherd, at such warning, of his flock
  Bethought him, and he to himself would say,
  "The winds are now devising work for me!"                          55
  And, truly, at all times, the storm, that drives
  The traveller to a shelter, summoned him
  Up to the mountains: he had been alone
  Amid the heart of many thousand mists,
  That came to him, and left him, on the heights.                    60
  So lived he till his eightieth year was past.
  And grossly that man errs, who should suppose
  That the green valleys, and the streams and rocks,
  Were things indifferent to the Shepherd's thoughts.
  Fields, where with cheerful spirits he had breathed                65
  The common air; hills, which with vigorous step
  He had so often climbed; [7] which had impressed
  So many incidents upon his mind
  Of hardship, skill or courage, joy or fear;
  Which, like a book, preserved the memory                           70
  Of the dumb animals, whom he had saved,
  Had fed or sheltered, linking to such acts
  The certainty of honourable gain;
  Those fields, those hills--what could they less? had laid [8]
  Strong hold on his affections, were to him                         75
  A pleasurable feeling of blind love,
  The pleasure which there is in life itself.

    His days had not been passed in singleness.
  His Helpmate was a comely matron, old--[9]
  Though younger than himself full twenty years.                     80
  She was a woman of a stirring life,
  Whose heart was in her house: two wheels she had
  Of antique form; this large, for spinning wool;
  That small, for flax; and if one wheel had rest,
  It was because the other was at work.                              85
  The Pair had but one inmate in their house,
  An only Child, who had been born to them
  When Michael, telling o'er his years, began
  To deem that he was old,--in shepherd's phrase,
  With one foot in the grave. This only Son,                         90
  With two brave sheep-dogs tried in many a storm,
  The one of an inestimable worth,
  Made all their household. I may truly say,
  That they were as a proverb in the vale
  For endless industry. When day was gone,                           95
  And from their occupations out of doors
  The Son and Father were come home, even then,
  Their labour did not cease; unless when all
  Turned to the [10] cleanly supper-board, and there,
  Each with a mess of pottage and skimmed milk,                     100
  Sat round the [11] basket piled with oaten cakes,
  And their plain home-made cheese. Yet when the [12] meal
  Was ended, Luke (for so the Son was named)
  And his old Father both betook themselves
  To such convenient work as might employ                           105
  Their hands by the fire-side; perhaps to card
  Wool for the Housewife's spindle, or repair
  Some injury done to sickle, flail, or scythe,
  Or other implement of house or field.

  Down from the ceiling, by the chimney's edge,                     110
  That [13] in our ancient uncouth country style
  With huge and black projection overbrowed [14]
  Large space beneath, as duly as the light
  Of day grew dim the Housewife hung a lamp;
  An aged utensil, which had performed                              115
  Service beyond all others of its kind.
  Early at evening did it burn--and late,
  Surviving comrade of uncounted hours,
  Which, going by from year to year, had found,
  And left the couple neither gay perhaps                           120
  Nor cheerful, yet with objects and with hopes,
  Living a life of eager industry.
  And now, when Luke had reached his [15] eighteenth year,
  There by the light of this old lamp they sate,
  Father and Son, while far [16] into the night                     125
  The Housewife plied her own peculiar work,
  Making the cottage through the silent hours
  Murmur as with the sound of summer flies. [B]
  [17] This [18] light was famous in its neighbourhood,
  And was a public symbol of the life                               130
  That [19] thrifty Pair had lived. For, as it chanced,
  Their cottage on a plot of rising ground
  Stood single, with large prospect, north and south,
  High into Easedale, up to Dunmail-Raise,
  And westward to the village near the lake;                        135
  And from this constant light, so regular
  And so far seen, the House itself, by all
  Who dwelt within the limits of the vale,
  Both old and young, was named THE EVENING STAR.

    Thus living on through such a length of years,                  140
  The Shepherd, if he loved himself, must needs
  Have loved his Helpmate; but to Michael's heart
  This son of his old age was yet more dear--
  Less from instinctive tenderness, [20] the same
  Fond spirit that blindly works in the blood of all--[21]          145
  Than [22] that a child, more than all other gifts
  That earth can offer to declining man, [23]
  Brings hope with it, and forward-looking thoughts,
  And stirrings of inquietude, when they
  By tendency of nature needs must fail.                            150
  [24] Exceeding was the love he bare to him,
  His heart and his heart's joy! For oftentimes
  Old Michael, while he was a babe in arms,
  Had done him female service, not alone
  For pastime [25] and delight, as is the use                       155
  Of fathers, but with patient mind enforced
  To acts of tenderness; and he had rocked
  His cradle, as with a woman's gentle hand. [26]
  And, in a later time, ere yet the Boy
  Had put on boy's attire, did Michael love,                        160
  Albeit of a stern unbending mind,
  To have the Young-one in his sight, when he
  Wrought in the field, or on his shepherd's stool
  Sate with a fettered sheep before him stretched
  Under the large old oak, that near his door                       165
  Stood single, and, from matchless depth of shade, [27]
  Chosen for the Shearer's covert from the sun,
  Thence in our rustic dialect was called
  The CLIPPING TREE, [C] a name which yet it bears.
  There, while they two were sitting in the shade,                  170
  With others round them, earnest all and blithe,
  Would Michael exercise his heart with looks
  Of fond correction and reproof bestowed
  Upon the Child, if he disturbed the sheep
  By catching at their legs, or with his shouts                     175
  Scared them, while they lay still beneath the shears.

  And when by Heaven's good grace the boy grew up
  A healthy Lad, and carried in his cheek
  Two steady roses that were five years old;
  Then Michael from a winter coppice cut                            180
  With his own hand a sapling, which he hooped
  With iron, making it throughout in all
  Due requisites a perfect shepherd's staff,
  And gave it to the Boy; wherewith equipt
  He as a watchman oftentimes was placed                            185
  At gate or gap, to stem or turn the flock;
  And, to his office prematurely called,
  There stood the urchin, as you will divine,
  Something between a hindrance and a help;
  And for this cause not always, I believe,                         190
  Receiving from his Father hire of praise;
  Though nought was left undone which staff, or voice,
  Or looks, or threatening gestures, could perform.

  But soon as Luke, full ten years old, could stand
  Against the mountain blasts; and to the heights,                  200
  Not fearing toil, nor length of weary ways,
  He with his Father daily went, and they
  Were as companions, why should I relate
  That objects which the Shepherd loved before
  Were dearer now? that from the Boy there came                     205
  Feelings and emanations--things which were
  Light to the sun and music to the wind;
  And that the old Man's heart seemed born again?

  Thus in his Father's sight the Boy grew up:
  And now, when he had reached his eighteenth year,                 210
  He was his comfort and his daily hope. [D]

  While in this sort the simple household lived [28]
  From day to day, to Michael's ear there came
  Distressful tidings. Long before the time
  Of which I speak, the Shepherd had been bound                     215
  In surety for his brother's son, a man
  Of an industrious life, and ample means;
  But unforeseen misfortunes suddenly
  Had prest upon him; and old Michael now
  Was summoned to discharge the forfeiture,                         220
  A grievous penalty, but little less
  Than half his substance. This unlooked-for claim,
  At the first hearing, for a moment took
  More hope out of his life than he supposed
  That any old man ever could have lost.                            225
  As soon as he had armed himself with strength
  To look his trouble in the face, it seemed
  The Shepherd's sole resource to sell at once [29]
  A portion of his patrimonial fields.
  Such was his first resolve; he thought again,                     230
  And his heart failed him. "Isabel," said he,
  Two evenings after he had heard the news,
  "I have been toiling more than seventy years,
  And in the open sunshine of God's love
  Have we all lived; yet if these fields of ours                    235
  Should pass into a stranger's hand, I think
  That I could not lie quiet in my grave.
  Our lot is a hard lot; the sun himself [30]
  Has scarcely been more diligent than I;
  And I have lived to be a fool at last                             240
  To my own family. An evil man
  That was, and made an evil choice, if he
  Were false to us; and if he were not false,
  There are ten thousand to whom loss like this
  Had been no sorrow. I forgive him;--but                           245
  'Twere better to be dumb than to talk thus.

  "When I began, my purpose was to speak
  Of remedies and of a cheerful hope.
  Our Luke shall leave us, Isabel; the land
  Shall not go from us, and it shall be free;                       250
  He shall possess it, free as is the wind
  That passes over it. We have, thou know'st,
  Another kinsman--he will be our friend
  In this distress. He is a prosperous man,
  Thriving in trade--and Luke to him shall go,                      255
  And with his kinsman's help and his own thrift
  He quickly will repair this loss, and then
  He may return to us. [31] If here he stay,
  What can be done? Where every one is poor,
  What can be gained?"                                              260
                       At this the old Man paused,
  And Isabel sat silent, for her mind
  Was busy, looking back into past times.
  There's Richard Bateman, thought she to herself, [E]
  He was a parish-boy--at the church-door                           265
  They made a gathering for him, shillings, pence
  And halfpennies, wherewith the neighbours bought
  A basket, which they filled with pedlar's wares;
  And, with this basket on his arm, the lad
  Went up to London, found a master there,                          270
  Who, out of many, chose the trusty boy
  To go and overlook his merchandise
  Beyond the seas; where he grew wondrous rich,
  And left estates and monies to the poor,
  And, at his birth-place, built a chapel floored                   275
  With marble, which he sent from foreign lands.
  These thoughts, and many others of like sort,
  Passed quickly through the mind of Isabel,
  And her face brightened. The old Man was glad,
  And thus resumed:--"Well, Isabel! this scheme                     280
  These two days, has been meat and drink to me.
  Far more than we have lost is left us yet.
--We have enough--I wish indeed that I
  Were younger;--but this hope is a good hope.
  Make ready Luke's best garments, of the best                      285
  Buy for him more, and let us send him forth
  To-morrow, or the next day, or to-night:
--If he _could_ [32] go, the Boy should go to-night."

  Here Michael ceased, and to the fields went forth
  With a light heart. [F] The Housewife for five days               290
  Was restless morn and night, and all day long
  Wrought on with her best fingers to prepare
  Things needful for the journey of her son.
  But Isabel was glad when Sunday came
  To stop her in her work: for, when she lay                        295
  By Michael's side, she through the last two nights [33]
  Heard him, how he was troubled in his sleep:
  And when they rose at morning she could see
  That all his hopes were gone. That day at noon
  She said to Luke, while they two by themselves                    300
  Were sitting at the door, "Thou must not go:
  We have no other Child but thee to lose,
  None to remember--do not go away,
  For if thou leave thy Father he will die."
  The Youth [34] made answer with a jocund voice;                   305
  And Isabel, when she had told her fears,
  Recovered heart. That evening her best fare
  Did she bring forth, and all together sat
  Like happy people round a Christmas fire.

  With daylight [35] Isabel resumed her work;                       310
  And all the ensuing week the house appeared
  As cheerful as a grove in Spring: at length
  The expected letter from their kinsman came,
  With kind assurances that he would do
  His utmost for the welfare of the Boy;                            315
  To which, requests were added, that forthwith
  He might be sent to him. Ten times or more
  The letter was read over; Isabel
  Went forth to show it to the neighbours round;
  Nor was there at that time on English land                        320
  A prouder heart than Luke's. When Isabel
  Had to her house returned, the old Man said,
  "He shall depart to-morrow." To this word
  The Housewife answered, talking much of things
  Which, if at such short notice he should go,                      325
  Would surely be forgotten. But at length
  She gave consent, and Michael was at ease.

  Near the tumultuous brook of Green-head Ghyll,
  In that deep valley, Michael had designed
  To build a Sheep-fold; [G] and, before he heard                   330
  The tidings of his melancholy loss,
  For this same purpose he had gathered up
  A heap of stones, which by the streamlet's edge [36]
  Lay thrown together, ready for the work.
  With Luke that evening thitherward he walked:                     335
  And soon as they had reached the place he stopped,
  And thus the old Man spake to him:--"My Son,
  To-morrow thou wilt leave me: with full heart
  I look upon thee, for thou art the same
  That wert a promise to me ere thy birth,                          340
  And all thy life hast been my daily joy.
  I will relate to thee some little part
  Of our two histories; 'twill do thee good
  When thou art from me, even if I should touch
  On things [37] thou canst not know of.--After thou                345
  First cam'st into the world--as oft befals [38]
  To new-born infants--thou didst sleep away
  Two days, and blessings from thy Father's tongue
  Then fell upon thee. Day by day passed on,
  And still I loved thee with increasing love.                      350
  Never to living ear came sweeter sounds
  Than when I heard thee by our own fire-side
  First uttering, without words, a natural tune;
  While [39] thou, a feeding babe, didst in thy joy
  Sing at thy Mother's breast. Month followed month,                355
  And in the open fields my life was passed
  And on [40] the mountains; else I think that thou
  Hadst been brought up upon thy Father's knees.
  But we were playmates, Luke: among these hills,
  As well thou knowest, in us the old and young                     360
  Have played together, nor with me didst thou
  Lack any pleasure which a boy can know."
  Luke had a manly heart; but at these words
  He sobbed aloud. The old Man grasped his hand,
  And said, "Nay, do not take it so--I see                          365
  That these are things of which I need not speak.
--Even to the utmost I have been to thee
  A kind and a good Father: and herein
  I but repay a gift which I myself
  Received at others' hands; for, though now old                    370
  Beyond the common life of man, I still
  Remember them who loved me in my youth.
  Both of them sleep together: here they lived,
  As all their Forefathers had done; and when
  At length their time was come, they were not loth                 375
  To give their bodies to the family mould.
  I wished that thou should'st live the life they lived:
  But, 'tis a long time to look back, my Son,
  And see so little gain from threescore years. [41]
  These fields were burthened when they came to me;                 380
  Till I was forty years of age, not more
  Than half of my inheritance was mine.
  I toiled and toiled; God blessed me in my work,
  And till these three weeks past the land was free.
--It looks as if it never could endure                            385
  Another Master. Heaven forgive me, Luke,
  If I judge ill for thee, but it seems good
  That thou should'st go,"

  At this the old Man paused;
  Then, pointing to the stones near which they stood,               390
  Thus, after a short silence, he resumed:
  "This was a work for us; and now, my Son,
  It is a work for me. But, lay one stone--
  Here, lay it for me, Luke, with thine own hands.
  [42] Nay, Boy, be of good hope;--we both may live                 395
  To see a better day. At eighty-four
  I still am strong and hale [43];--do thou thy part;
  I will do mine.--I will begin again
  With many tasks that were resigned to thee:
  Up to the heights, and in among the storms,                       400
  Will I without thee go again, and do
  All works which I was wont to do alone,
  Before I knew thy face.--Heaven bless thee, Boy!
  Thy heart these two weeks has been beating fast
  With many hopes; it should be so--yes--yes--405
  I knew that thou could'st never have a wish
  To leave me, Luke: thou hast been bound to me
  Only by links of love: when thou art gone,
  What will be left to us!--But, I forget
  My purposes. Lay now the corner-stone,                            410
  As I requested; and hereafter, Luke,
  When thou art gone away, should evil men
  Be thy companions, think of me, my Son,
  And of this moment; hither turn thy thoughts,
  And God will strengthen thee: amid all fear                       415
  And all temptation, Luke, I pray that thou
  May'st bear in mind the life thy Fathers lived, [44]
  Who, being innocent, did for that cause
  Bestir them in good deeds. Now, fare thee well--
  When thou return'st, thou in this place wilt see                  420
  A work which is not here: a covenant
  'Twill be between us; but, whatever fate
  Befal thee, I shall love thee to the last,
  And bear thy memory with me to the grave."

  The Shepherd ended here; and Luke stooped down,                   425
  And, as his Father had requested, laid
  The first stone of the Sheep-fold. At the sight
  The old Man's grief broke from him; to his heart
  He pressed his Son, he kissed him and wept;
  And to the house together they returned.                          430
--Hushed was that House in peace, or seeming peace, [45]
  Ere the night fell:--with morrow's dawn the Boy [46]
  Began his journey, and when he had reached
  The public way, he put on a bold face;
  And all the neighbours, as he passed their doors,                 435
  Came forth with wishes and with farewell prayers,
  That followed him till he was out of sight.

  A good report did from their Kinsman come,
  Of Luke and his well doing: and the Boy
  Wrote loving letters, full of wondrous news,                      440
  Which, as the Housewife phrased it, were throughout
  "The prettiest letters that were ever seen."
  Both parents read them with rejoicing hearts.
  So, many months passed on: and once again
  The Shepherd went about his daily work                            445
  With confident and cheerful thoughts; and now
  Sometimes when he could find a leisure hour
  He to that valley took his way, and there
  Wrought at the Sheep-fold. Meantime Luke began
  To slacken in his duty; and, at length,                           450
  He in the dissolute city gave himself
  To evil courses: ignominy and shame
  Fell on him, so that he was driven at last
  To seek a hiding-place beyond the seas.

  There is a comfort in the strength of love;                       455
  'Twill make a thing endurable, which else
  Would overset the brain, or break the heart: [47]
  I have conversed with more than one who well
  Remember the old Man, and what he was
  Years after he had heard this heavy news.                         460
  His bodily frame had been from youth to age
  Of an unusual strength. Among the rocks
  He went, and still looked up to sun and cloud, [48]
  And listened to the wind; and, as before,
  Performed all kinds of labour for his sheep,                      465
  And for the land, his small inheritance.
  And to that hollow dell from time to time
  Did he repair, to build the Fold of which
  His flock had need. 'Tis not forgotten yet
  The pity which was then in every heart                            470
  For the old Man--and 'tis believed by all
  That many and many a day he thither went,
  And never lifted up a single stone.

  There, by the Sheep-fold, sometimes was he seen
  Sitting alone, or with his faithful Dog, [49]                     475
  Then old, beside him, lying at his feet.
  The length of full seven years, from time to time,
  He at the building of this Sheep-fold wrought,
  And left the work unfinished when he died.
  Three years, or little more, did Isabel                           480
  Survive her Husband: at her death the estate
  Was sold, and went into a stranger's hand.
  The Cottage which was named the EVENING STAR
  Is gone--the ploughshare has been through the ground
  On which it stood; great changes have been wrought                485
  In all the neighbourhood:--yet the oak is left
  That grew beside their door; and the remains
  Of the unfinished Sheep-fold may be seen
  Beside the boisterous brook of Green-head Ghyll.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  ... beside ...      1800.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  No habitation there is seen; but such
  As journey thither ...      1800.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  There is ...      1800.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  And to that place a story appertains,
  Which, though it be ungarnish'd with events,
  Is not unfit, ...      1800.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  ... It was the first,
  The earliest of those tales ...       1800.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  ... he had learn'd ...      1800.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

  ... the hills, which he so oft
  Had climb'd with vigorous steps; ...      1800.]


[Variant 8:

1832.

  ... linking to such acts,
  So grateful in themselves, the certainty
  Of honourable gains; these fields, these hills
  Which were his living Being, even more
  Than his own Blood--what could they less? had laid        1800.

  ... gain ...                                              1805.]


[Variant 9:

1815.

  He had not passed his days in singleness.
  He had a Wife, a comely Matron, old       1800.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  ... their ...    1800.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

  ... their ...    1800.]


[Variant 12:

1836.

  ... their ...    1800.]


[Variant 13:

1827.

  Which ...    1800.]


[Variant 14:

1836.

  Did with a huge projection overbrow    1800.]


[Variant 15:

1827.

  ... was in his ...    1800.]


[Variant 16:

1836.

  ... while late ...    1800.]


[Variant 17:

  Not with a waste of words, but for the sake
  Of pleasure, which I know that I shall give
  To many living now, I of this Lamp
  Speak thus minutely: for there are no few
  Whose memories will bear witness to my tale.

These lines appeared only in the editions of 1800 and 1802.]


[Variant 18:

1815.

  The ...    1800.]


[Variant 19:

1832.

  The ...    1800.]


[Variant 20:

1827.

  ... yet more dear--
  Effect which might perhaps have been produc'd
  By that instinctive tenderness, ...    1800.]


[Variant 21:

1836.

  Blind Spirit, which is in the blood of all,    1800.]


[Variant 22:

1827.

  Or ...    1800.]


[Variant 23: This line was first printed in the edition of 1836.]


[Variant 24:

  From such, and other causes, to the thoughts
  Of the old Man his only Son was now
  The dearest object that he knew on earth.

Only in the editions of 1800 to 1820.]


[Variant 25:

1827.

  For dalliance ...    1800.]


[Variant 26:

1836.

  His cradle with a woman's gentle hand.    1800.]


[Variant 27:

1836.

  ... when he
  Had work by his own door, or when he sate
  With sheep before him on his Shepherd's stool,
  Beneath that large old Oak, which near their door
  Stood, and from its enormous breadth of shade    1800.]


[Variant 28:

1815.

  While this good household thus were living on    1800.

  While in the fashion which I have described
  This simple Household thus were living on        1800 (2nd issue).]


[Variant 29:

1836.

  As soon as he had gather'd so much strength
  That he could look his trouble in the face,
  It seem'd that his sole refuge was to sell    1800.]


[Variant 30:

1827.

  ... itself    1800.]


[Variant 31:

1836.

  May come again to us ...    1800.]


[Variant 32: Italics were first used in 1827.]


[Variant 33:

1836.

  ... for the two last nights     1800.

  ... through the                 1815.]


[Variant 34:

1815.

  The Lad ...     1800.]


[Variant 35:

1820.

  Next morning ...     1800.]


[Variant 36:

1815.

  ... which close to the brook side   1800.]


[Variant 37:

1836.

  ... should speak
  Of things ...    1800.]


[Variant 38:

1827.

  ... as it befalls    1800.]


[Variant 39:

1836.

  When ...    1800.]


[Variant 40:

1815.

  ... in ...    1800.]


[Variant 41:

1827.

  ... from sixty years.    1800.]


[Variant 42:

  I for the purpose brought thee to this place.

This line appears only in the edition of 1800.]


[Variant 43:

1827.

  ... stout; ...    1800.]


[Variant 44:

1802.

  ... should evil men
  Be thy companions, let this Sheep-fold be
  Thy anchor and thy shield; amid all fear
  And all temptation, let it be to thee
  An emblem of the life thy Fathers liv'd,    1800.]


[Variant 45: This line was added in the edition of 1815.]


[Variant 46:

1815.

  Next morning, as had been resolv'd, the Boy    1800.]


[Variant 47:

1820.

  Would break the heart:--Old Michael found it so.    1800.]


[Variant 48:

1836.

  ... look'd up upon the sun,    1800.

  ... towards the sun,           1832.]


[Variant 49:

1836.

  Sitting alone, with that his faithful Dog,    1800.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The Rev. Thomas Hutchinson, Kimbolton, tells me that in his
copy of the edition of "Lyrical Ballads" of 1800 there is

  "on the blank page facing the announcement, written in Wordsworth's
  handwriting, the following lines:

    'Though it be in th' humblest rank of life,
    And in the lowest region of our speech,
    Yet is it in that kind as best accords
    With rural passion.'"

Ed.]


[Footnote B: The following lines were written before April 1801, and
were at one time meant to be inserted after "summer flies," and before
"Not with a waste of words." They are quoted in a letter of Wordsworth's
to Thomas Poole of Nether Stowey, dated April 9th, 1801.

    'Though in their occupations they would pass
    Whole hours with but small interchange of speech,
    Yet were there times in which they did not want
    Discourse both wise and prudent, shrewd remarks
    Of daily providence, clothed in images
    Lively and beautiful, in rural forms
    That made their conversation fresh and fair
    As is a landscape;--And the shepherd oft
    Would draw out of his heart the obscurities
    And admirations that were there, of God
    And of His works, or, yielding to the bent
    Of his peculiar humour, would let loose
    The tongue and give it the wind's freedom,--then
    Discoursing on remote imaginations, story,
    Conceits, devices, day-dreams, thoughts and schemes,
    The fancies of a solitary man.'

Ed.]


[Footnote C: Clipping is the word used in the North of England for
shearing.--W. W. 1800]


[Footnote D: The lines from "Though nought was left," to "daily hope"
(192-206) were, by a printer's blunder, omitted from the first issue of
1800. In the second issue of that year they are given in full.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: The story alluded to here is well known in the country. The
chapel is called Ings Chapel; and is on the right hand side of the road
leading from Kendal to Ambleside.--W. W. 1800.

Ings chapel is in the parish of Kendal, about two miles east of
Windermere. The following extract from Lewis's Topographical Dictionary
further explains the allusion in the poem:

  "_Hugil_, a chapelry six and a quarter miles from Kendal. The chapel,
  rebuilt in 1743 by Robert Bateman, stands in the village of Ings,
  which is in this chapelry. The free school was endowed with land in
  1650 by Roland Wilson, producing at present ?12 per annum. The average
  number of boys is twenty-five. This endowment was augmented by ?8 per
  annum by Robert Bateman, who gave ?1000 for purchasing an estate, and
  erected eight alms-houses for as many poor families, besides a
  donation of ?12 per annum to the curate. This worthy benefactor was
  born here, and from a state of indigence succeeded in amassing
  considerable wealth by mercantile pursuits. He is stated to have been
  poisoned, in the straits of Gibraltar, on his voyage from Leghorn,
  with a valuable cargo, by the captain of the vessel,"

(See 'The Topographical Dictionary of England', by Samuel Lewis, vol.
ii. p. 1831.)--Ed.]


[Footnote F: There is a slight inconsistency here. The conversation is
represented as taking place in the evening (see l. 227).--Ed.]


[Footnote G: It may be proper to inform some readers, that a sheep-fold
in these mountains is an unroofed building of stone walls, with
different divisions. It is generally placed by the side of a brook, for
the convenience of washing the sheep; but it is also useful as a shelter
for them, and as a place to drive them into, to enable the shepherds
conveniently to single out one or more for any particular purpose.--W.
W. 1800.]



From the Fenwick note it will be seen that Michael's sheep-fold, in
Green-head Ghyll, existed--at least the remains of it--in 1843. Its
site, however, is now very difficult to identify. There is a sheep-fold
above Boon Beck, which one passes immediately on entering the common,
going up Green-head Ghyll. It is now "finished," and used when required.
There are remains of walling, much higher up the ghyll; but these are
probably the work of miners, formerly engaged there. Michael's cottage
had been destroyed when the poem was written, in 1800. It stood where
the coach-house and stables of "the Hollins" now stand. But one who
visits Green-head Ghyll, and wishes to realize Michael in his old
age--as described in this poem--should ascend the ghyll till it almost
reaches the top of Fairfield; where the old man, during eighty years,

    'had learned the meaning of all winds,
  Of blasts of every tone,'

and where he

        'had been alone,
  Amid the heart of many thousand mists,
  That came to him, and left him, on the heights.'

By so doing he will be better able to realize the spirit of the poem,
than by trying to identify the site either of the "unfinished
sheep-fold," or of the house named the "Evening Star." What Wordsworth
said to the Hon. Mr. Justice Coleridge in reference to 'The Brothers'
has been quoted in the note to that poem, p. 203. On the same occasion
he remarked, in reference to 'Michael':

  "'Michael' was founded on the son of an old couple having become
  dissolute, and run away from his parents; and on an old shepherd
  having been seven years in building up a sheep-fold in a solitary
  valley."

('Memoirs of Wordsworth', by the late Bishop of Lincoln, vol. ii. p.
305.)

The following extracts from Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal, show
the carefulness with which the poem 'Michael' was composed, and the
frequent revisions which it underwent:

  'Oct. 11 [1800.] "We walked up Green-head ghyll in search of a
  sheepfold.... The sheepfold is falling away. It is built nearly in the
  form of a heart unequally divided."

  13. "William composing in the evening."

  15. "W. composed a little." ... "W. again composed at the sheepfold
  after dinner."

  18. "W. worked all the morning at the sheepfold, but in vain. He lay
  down till 7 o'clock, but did not sleep."

  19. "William got to work."

  20. "W. worked in the morning at the sheepfold."

  21. "W. had been unsuccessful in the morning at the sheepfold."

  22. "W. composed, without much success, at the sheepfold."

  23. "W. was not successful in composition in the evening."

  24. "W. was only partly successful in composition."

  26. "W. composed a good deal all the morning."

  28. "W. could not compose much; fatigued himself with altering."

  30. "W. worked at his poem all the morning."

  Nov. 10. "W. at the sheepfold."

  12. "W. has been working at the sheepfold."

  Dec. 9. "W. finished his poem to-day."'

It is impossible to say with certainty that the entry under Dec. 9
refers to 'Michael', but if it does, it is evident that Wordsworth
wrought continuously at this poem for nearly two months.

On April 9, 1801, Wordsworth wrote to Thomas Poole:

  "In writing it" ('Michael'), "I had your character often before my
  eyes; and sometimes thought that I was delineating such a man as you
  yourself would have been, under the same circumstances."

The following is part of a letter written by Wordsworth to Charles James
Fox in 1802, and sent with a copy of "Lyrical Ballads":

  "In the two poems, 'The Brothers' and 'Michael', I have attempted to
  draw a picture of the domestic affections, as I know they exist
  amongst a class of men who are now almost confined to the north of
  England. They are small independent 'proprietors' of land, here called
  'statesmen,' men of respectable education, who daily labour on their
  own little properties. The domestic affections will always be strong
  amongst men who live in a country not crowded with population; if
  these men are placed above poverty. But, if they are proprietors of
  small estates which have descended to them from their ancestors, the
  power which these affections will acquire amongst such men, is
  inconceivable by those who have only had an opportunity of observing
  hired labourers, farmers, and the manufacturing poor. Their little
  tract of land serves as a kind of permanent rallying point for their
  domestic feelings, as a tablet on which they are written, which makes
  them objects of memory in a thousand instances, when they would
  otherwise be forgotten. It is a fountain fitted to the nature of
  social man, from which supplies of affection as pure as his heart was
  intended for, are daily drawn. This class of men is rapidly
  disappearing.... The two poems that I have mentioned were written with
  a view to show that men who do not wear fine clothes can feel deeply.
  'Pectus enim est quod disertos facit, et vis mentis. Ideoque imperitis
  quoque, si modo sint aliquo affectu concitati, verba non desunt.' The
  poems are faithful copies from nature; and I hope whatever effect they
  may have upon you, you will at least be able to perceive that they may
  excite profitable sympathies in many kind and good hearts; and may in
  some small degree enlarge our feelings of reverence for our species,
  and our knowledge of human nature, by showing that our best qualities
  are possessed by men whom we are too apt to consider, not with
  reference to the points in which they resemble us, but to those in
  which they manifestly differ from us." (See 'Correspondence of Sir
  Thomas Hanmer', by Sir Henry Burnbury, p. 436.)

A number of fragments, originally meant to be parts of 'Michael',--or at
least written with such a possibility in view,--will be found in the
Appendix to the eighth volume of this edition.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





1801


'The Sparrow's Nest', and the sonnet on Skiddaw, along with some
translations from Chaucer, belong to the year 1801. During this year,
however, 'The Excursion' was in progress. In its earlier stages, and
before the plan of 'The Recluse' was matured, the introductory part was
familiarly known, and talked of in the Wordsworth household, by the name
of "The Pedlar." The following extracts from Dorothy Wordsworth's
Journal of 1801 will show the progress that was being made with it:

  "Dec. 21.--Wm. sate beside me, and wrote 'The Pedlar.' 22nd.--W.
  composed a few lines of 'The Pedlar.' 23rd.--William worked at 'The
  Ruined Cottage'" (this was the name of the first part of 'The
  Excursion', in which 'The Pedlar' was included), "and made himself
  very ill," etc.

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE SPARROW'S NEST


Composed 1801.--Published 1807


[Written in the orchard, Town-end, Grasmere. At the end of the garden of
my father's house at Cockermouth was a high terrace that commanded a
fine view of the river Derwent and Cockermouth Castle. This was our
favourite play-ground. The terrace wall, a low one, was covered with
closely-clipt privet and roses, which gave an almost impervious shelter
to birds who built their nests there. The latter of these stanzas [A]
alludes to one of those nests.--I.F.]

This poem was first published in the series entitled "Moods of my own
Mind," in 1807. In 1815 it was included among the "Poems founded on the
Affections," and in 1845 was transferred to the "Poems referring to the
Period of Childhood."--Ed.




  Behold, within the leafy shade,
  Those bright blue eggs together laid!
  On me the chance-discovered sight
  Gleamed like a vision of delight. [1]
  I started--seeming to espy                            5
  The home and sheltered bed,
  The Sparrow's dwelling, which, hard by
  My Father's house, in wet or dry
  My sister Emmeline and I
      Together visited.                                10

  She looked at it and seemed to fear it;
  Dreading, tho' wishing, to be near it: [2]
  Such heart was in her, being then
  A little Prattler among men.
  The Blessing of my later years                       15
  Was with me when a boy:
  She gave me eyes, she gave me ears;
  And humble cares, and delicate fears;
  A heart, the fountain of sweet tears;
      And love, and thought, and joy.                  20



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  Look, five blue eggs are gleaming there!
  Few visions have I seen more fair,
  Nor many prospects of delight
  More pleasing than that simple sight!     1807.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  She look'd at it as if she fear'd it;
  Still wishing, dreading to be near it:     1807.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE

[Footnote A: So it stands in the Fenwick note; but it should evidently
read, "The following stanzas allude."--Ed.]


Wordsworth's "sister Emmeline" was his only sister, Dorothy; and in the
MS. sent originally to the printer the line was "My sister Dorothy and
I." This poem is referred to in a subsequent one, 'A Farewell', l. 56.
See page 326 of this volume.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"PELION AND OSSA FLOURISH SIDE BY SIDE"


Composed 1801.--Published 1815


One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets." From 1836 onwards it bore the title
'1801'.--Ed.




  Pelion and Ossa flourish side by side,
  Together in immortal [1] books enrolled:
  His ancient dower Olympus hath not sold;
  And that inspiring Hill, which "did divide
  Into two ample horns his forehead wide," [A]                   5
  Shines with poetic radiance as of old;
  While not an English Mountain we behold
  By the celestial Muses glorified.
  Yet round our sea-girt shore they rise in crowds:
  What was the great Parnassus' self to Thee,                   10
  Mount Skiddaw? In his natural sovereignty
  Our British Hill is nobler [2] far; he shrouds
  His double front among Atlantic clouds, [3]
  And pours forth streams more sweet than Castaly.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  illustrious ...     MS.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  fairer ...      1815.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  His double-fronted head in higher clouds,     1815.

  ... among Atlantic clouds,                      MS.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See Spenser's translation of 'Virgil's Gnat', ll. 21-2:

  'Or where on Mount Parnasse, the Muses brood.
  Doth his broad forehead like two horns divide,
  And the sweet waves of sounding Castaly
  With liquid foot doth glide down easily.'

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





SELECTIONS FROM CHAUCER

MODERNISED


Wordsworth's modernisations of Chaucer were all written in 1801. Two of
them were from the Canterbury Tales, but his version of one of
these--'The Manciple's Tale'--has never been printed. Of the three poems
which were published, the first--'The Prioress' Tale'--was included in
the edition of 1820. The 'Troilus and Cressida' and 'The Cuckoo and the
Nightingale' were included in the "Poems of Early and Late Years"
(1842); but they had been published the year before, in a small volume
entitled 'The Poems of Geoffrey Chaucer Modernised' (London, 1841), a
volume to which Elizabeth Barrett, Leigh Hunt, R. H. Home, Thomas
Powell, and others contributed. Wordsworth wrote thus of the project to
Mr. Powell, in an unpublished and undated letter, written probably in
1840:

  "I am glad that you enter so warmly into the Chaucerian project, and
  that Mr. L. Hunt is disposed to give his valuable aid to it. For
  myself, I cannot do more than I offered, to place at your disposal
  'The Prioress' Tale' already published, 'The Cuckoo and the
  Nightingale', 'The Manciple's Tale', and I rather think (but I cannot
  just now find it) a small portion of the 'Troilus and Cressida'. You
  ask my opinion about that poem. Speaking from a recollection only, of
  many years past, I should say it would be found too long and probably
  tedious. 'The Knight's Tale' is also very long; but, though Dryden has
  executed it, in his own way observe, with great spirit and harmony, he
  has suffered so much of the simplicity, and with that of the beauty
  and occasional pathos of the original to escape, that I should be
  pleased to hear that a new version was to be attempted upon my
  principle by some competent person. It would delight me to read every
  part of Chaucer over again--for I reverence and admire him above
  measure--with a view to your work; but my eyes will not permit me to
  do so. Who will undertake the Prologue to the Canterbury Tales? For
  your publication that is indispensable, and I fear it will prove very
  difficult. It is written, as you know, in the couplet measure; and
  therefore I have nothing to say upon its metre, but in respect to the
  poems in stanza, neither in 'The Prioress' Tale' nor in 'The Cuckoo
  and Nightingale' have I kept to the rule of the original as to the
  form, and number, and position of the rhymes; thinking it enough if I
  kept the same number of lines in each stanza; and this is, I think,
  all that is necessary, and all that can be done without sacrificing
  the substance of sense too often to the mere form of sound."

In a subsequent letter to Professor Henry Reed of Philadelphia, dated
"Rydal Mount, January 13th, 1841," Wordsworth said:

  "So great is my admiration of Chaucer's genius, and so profound my
  reverence for him as an instrument in the hands of Providence, for
  spreading the light of literature through his native land, that
  notwithstanding the defects and faults in this publication"
  (referring, I presume, to the volume, 'The Poems of Geoffrey Chaucer
  Modernised'), "I am glad of it, as a means of making many acquainted
  with the original, who would otherwise be ignorant of everything about
  him but his name."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE PRIORESS' TALE


Translated 1801. [A]--Published 1820


  "Call up him who left half told
  The story of Cambuscan bold." [B]

In the following Piece I have allowed myself no farther deviations from
the original than were necessary for the fluent reading, and instant
understanding, of the Author: so much however is the language altered
since Chaucer's time, especially in pronunciation, that much was to be
removed, and its place supplied with as little incongruity as possible.
The ancient accent has been retained in a few conjunctions, such as
_also_ and _alway_, from a conviction that such sprinklings of antiquity
would be admitted, by persons of taste, to have a graceful accordance
with the subject.--W. W. (1820).

The fierce bigotry of the Prioress forms a fine back ground for her
tender-hearted sympathies with the Mother and Child; and the mode in
which the story is told amply atones for the extravagance of the
miracle.--W. W. (added in 1827).

In the editions of 1820 and 1827 'The Prioress' Tale' followed 'The
White Doe of Rylstone'. In 1832 it followed the "Inscriptions"; and in
1836 it was included among the "Poems founded on the Affections." In
1845 it found its appropriate place in the "Selections from Chaucer
modernised."--Ed.




  I       "O Lord, our Lord! how wondrously," (quoth she)
          "Thy name in this large world is spread abroad!
          For not alone by men of dignity
          Thy worship is performed and precious laud;
          But by the mouths of children, gracious God!              5
          Thy goodness is set forth; they when they lie
          Upon the breast thy name do glorify.

  II      "Wherefore in praise, the worthiest that I may,
          Jesu! of thee, and the white Lily-flower
          Which did thee bear, and is a Maid for aye,              10
          To tell a story I will use my power;
          Not that I may increase her honour's dower,
          For she herself is honour, and the root
          Of goodness, next her Son, our soul's best boot.

  III     "O Mother Maid! O Maid and Mother free!                  15
          O bush unburnt! burning in Moses' sight!
          That down didst ravish from the Deity,
          Through humbleness, the spirit that did alight
          Upon thy heart, whence, through that glory's might,
          Conceived was the Father's sapience,                     20
          Help me to tell it in thy reverence!

  IV      "Lady! thy goodness, thy magnificence,
          Thy virtue, and thy great humility,
          Surpass all science and all utterance;
          For sometimes, Lady! ere men pray to thee                25
          Thou goest before in thy benignity,
          The light to us vouchsafing of thy prayer,
          To be our guide unto thy Son so dear.

  V       "My knowledge is so weak, O blissful Queen!
          To tell abroad thy mighty worthiness,                    30
          That I the weight of it may not sustain;
          But as a child of twelvemonths old or less,
          That laboureth his language to express,
          Even so fare I; and therefore, I thee pray,
          Guide thou my song which I of thee shall say.            35

  VI      "There was in Asia, in a mighty town,
          'Mong Christian folk, a street where Jews might be,
          Assigned to them and given them for their own
          By a great Lord, for gain and usury,
          Hateful to Christ and to his company;                    40
          And through this street who list might ride and wend;
          Free was it, and unbarred at either end.

  VII     "A little school of Christian people stood
          Down at the farther end, in which there were
          A nest of children come of Christian blood,              45
          That learned in that school from year to year
          Such sort of doctrine as men used there,
          That is to say, to sing and read also,
          As little children in their childhood do.

  VIII    "Among these children was a Widow's son,                 50
          A little scholar, scarcely seven years old, [C]
          Who day by day unto this school hath gone,
          And eke, when he the image did behold
          Of Jesu's Mother, as he had been told,
          This Child was wont to kneel adown and say               55
          _Ave Marie_, as he goeth by the way.

  IX      "This Widow thus her little Son hath taught
          Our blissful Lady, Jesu's Mother dear,
          To worship aye, and he forgat it not;
          For simple infant hath a ready ear.                      60
          Sweet is the holiness of youth: and hence,
          Calling to mind this matter when I may,
          Saint Nicholas in my presence standeth aye,
          For he so young to Christ did reverence. [D]

  X       "This little Child, while in the school he sate          65
          His Primer conning with an earnest cheer, [E]
          The whilst the rest their anthem-book repeat
          The _Alma Redemptoris_ did he hear;
          And as he durst he drew him near and near,
          And hearkened to the words and to the note,              70
          Till the first verse he learned it all by rote.

  XI      "This Latin knew he nothing what it said,
          For he too tender was of age to know;
          But to his comrade he repaired, and prayed
          That he the meaning of this song would show,             75
          And unto him declare why men sing so;
          This oftentimes, that he might be at ease,
          This child did him beseech on his bare knees.

  XII     "His Schoolfellow, who elder was than he,
          Answered him thus:--'This song, I have heard say,        80
          Was fashioned for our blissful Lady free;
          Her to salute, and also her to pray
          To be our help upon our dying day:
          If there is more in this, I know it not:
          Song do I learn,--small grammar I have got.'             85

  XIII    "'And is this song fashioned in reverence
          Of Jesu's Mother?' said this Innocent;
          'Now, certes, I will use my diligence
          To con it all ere Christmas-tide be spent;
          Although I for my Primer shall be shent,                 90
          And shall be beaten three times in an hour,
          Our Lady I will praise with all my power.'

  XIV     "His Schoolfellow, whom he had so besought,
          As they went homeward taught him privily
          And then he sang it well and fearlessly,                 95
          From word to word according to the note:
          Twice in a day it passed through his throat;
          Homeward and schoolward whensoe'er he went,
          On Jesu's Mother fixed was his intent.

  XV      "Through all the Jewry (this before said I)             100
          This little Child, as he came to and fro,
          Full merrily then would he sing and cry,
          O _Alma Redemptoris!_ high and low:
          The sweetness of Christ's Mother pierced so
          His heart, that her to praise, to her to pray,          105
          He cannot stop his singing by the way.

  XVI     "The Serpent, Satan, our first foe, that hath
          His wasp's nest in Jew's heart, upswelled--'O woe,
          O Hebrew people!' said he in his wrath,
          'Is it an honest thing? Shall this be so?               110
          That such a Boy where'er he lists [1] shall go
          In your despite, and sing his hymns and saws,
          Which is against the reverence of our laws!'

  XVII    "From that day forward have the Jews conspired
          Out of the world this Innocent to chase;                115
          And to this end a Homicide they hired,
          That in an alley had a privy place,
          And, as the Child 'gan to the school to pace,
          This cruel Jew him seized, and held him fast
          And cut his throat, and in a pit him cast.              120

  XVIII   "I say that him into a pit they threw,
          A loathsome pit, whence noisome scents exhale;
          O cursed folk! away, ye Herods new!
          What may your ill intentions you avail?
          Murder will out; certes it will not fail;               125
          Know, that the honour of high God may spread,
          The blood cries out on your accursed deed.

  XIX     "O Martyr 'stablished in virginity!
          Now may'st thou sing for aye before the throne,
          Following the Lamb celestial," quoth she,               130
          "Of which the great Evangelist, Saint John,
          In Patmos wrote, who saith of them that go
          Before the Lamb singing continually,
          That never fleshly woman they did know.

  XX      "Now this poor widow waiteth all that night             135
          After her little Child, and he came not;
          For which, by earliest glimpse of morning light,
          With face all pale with dread and busy thought,
          She at the School and elsewhere him hath sought,
          Until thus far she learned, that he had been            140
          In the Jews' street, and there he last was seen.

  XXI     "With Mother's pity in her breast enclosed
          She goeth, as she were half out of her mind,
          To every place wherein she hath supposed
          By likelihood her little Son to find;                   145
          And ever on Christ's Mother meek and kind
          She cried, till to the Jewry she was brought,
          And him among the accursed Jews she sought.

  XXII    "She asketh, and she piteously doth pray
          To every Jew that dwelleth in that place                150
          To tell her if her child had passed that way;
          They all said--Nay; but Jesu of his grace
          Gave to her thought, that in a little space
          She for her Son in that same spot did cry
          Where he was cast into a pit hard by.                   155

  XXIII   "O thou great God that dost perform thy laud
          By mouths of Innocents, lo! here thy might;
          This gem of chastity, this emerald,
          And eke of martyrdom this ruby bright,
          There, where with mangled throat he lay upright,        160
          The _Alma Redemptoris_ 'gan to sing
          So loud, that with his voice the place did ring.

  XXIV    "The Christian folk that through the Jewry went
          Come to the spot in wonder at the thing;
          And hastily they for the Provost sent;                  165
          Immediately he came, not tarrying,
          And praiseth Christ that is our heavenly King,
          And eke his Mother, honour of Mankind:
          Which done, he bade that they the Jews should bind.

  XXV     "This Child with piteous lamentation then               170
          Was taken up, singing his song alway;
          And with procession great and pomp of men
          To the next Abbey him they bare away;
          His Mother swooning by the body [2] lay:
          And scarcely could the people that were near            175
          Remove this second Rachel from the bier.

  XXVI    "Torment and shameful death to every one
          This Provost doth for those bad Jews prepare
          That of this murder wist, and that anon:
          Such wickedness his judgments cannot spare;             180
          Who will do evil, evil shall he bear;
          Them therefore with wild horses did he draw,
          And after that he hung them by the law.

  XXVII   "Upon his bier this Innocent doth lie
          Before the altar while the Mass doth last:              185
          The Abbot with his convent's company
          Then sped themselves to bury him full fast;
          And, when they holy water on him cast,
          Yet spake this Child when sprinkled was the water;
          And sang, O _Alma Redemptoris Mater!_                   190

  XXVIII  "This Abbot, for he was a holy man,
          As all Monks are, or surely ought to be, [3]
          In supplication to the Child began
          Thus saying, 'O dear Child! I summon thee
          In virtue of the holy Trinity                           195
          Tell me the cause why thou dost sing this hymn,
          Since that thy throat is cut, as it doth seem.'

  XXIX    "'My throat is cut unto the bone, I trow,'
          Said this young Child, 'and by the law of kind
          I should have died, yea many hours ago;                 200
          But Jesus Christ, as in the books ye find,
          Will that his glory last, and be in mind;
          And, for the worship of his Mother dear,
          Yet may I sing, _O Alma!_ loud and clear.

  XXX     "'This well of mercy, Jesu's Mother sweet,              205
          After my knowledge I have loved alway;
          And in the hour when I my death did meet
          To me she came, and thus to me did say,
          "Thou in thy dying sing this holy lay,"
          As ye have heard; and soon as I had sung                210
          Methought she laid a grain upon my tongue.

  XXXI    "'Wherefore I sing, nor can from song refrain,
          In honour of that blissful Maiden free,
          Till from my tongue off-taken is the grain;
          And after that thus said she unto me;                   215
          "My little Child, then will I come for thee
          Soon as the grain from off thy tongue they take:
          Be not dismayed, I will not thee forsake!"'

  XXXII   "This holy Monk, this Abbot--him mean I,
          Touched then his tongue, and took away the grain;       220
          And he gave up the ghost full peacefully;
          And, when the Abbot had this wonder seen,
          His salt tears trickled down like showers of rain;
          And on his face he dropped upon the ground,
          And still he lay as if he had been bound.               225

  XXXIII  "Eke the whole Convent on the pavement lay,
          Weeping and praising Jesu's Mother dear;
          And after that they rose, and took their way,
          And lifted up this Martyr from the bier,
          And in a tomb of precious marble clear                  230
          Enclosed his uncorrupted body sweet.--[F]
          Where'er he be, God grant us him to meet!

  XXXIV   "Young Hew of Lincoln! in like sort laid low
          By cursed Jews--thing well and widely known,
          For it was done a little while ago--[4]                 235
          Pray also thou for us, while here we tarry
          Weak sinful folk, that God, with pitying eye,
          In mercy would his mercy multiply
          On us, for reverence of his Mother Mary!"



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  ... list ...     1820.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  ... by the Bier ...     1820.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  This Abbot who had been a holy man
  And was, as all Monks are, or ought to be, [a]     1820.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  For not long since was dealt the cruel blow,     1820.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A:

  "Friday, 4th December 1801.... William translating 'The Prioress'
  Tale'."

  "Saturday, 5th. William finished 'The Prioress' Tale', and after tea,
  Mary and he wrote it out"

(Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal).--Ed.]


[Footnote B: See 'Il Penseroso', l. 110.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Chaucer's phrase is "a litel clergeon," Wordsworth's, "a
little scholar;" but "clergeon" is a chorister, not a scholar.--Ed.]


[Footnote D:

  "Chaucer's text is:

    'Thus hath this widow her litel child i-taught
    Our blissful lady, Criste's moder deere,
    To worschip ay, and he forgat it nought;
    For sely child wil alway soone leere.'

  'For sely child wil alway soone leere,' i.e. for a happy child will
  always learn soon. Wordsworth renders:

    'For simple infant hath a ready ear,'

  and adds:

    'Sweet is the holiness of youth,'

  extending the stanza to receive this addition from seven to eight
  lines, with an altered rhyme-system."

(Professor Edward Dowden, in the 'Transactions of the Wordsworth
Society', No. III.)--Ed.]


[Footnote E: Chaucer's text is:

  'This litel child his litel book lernynge
  As he sat in the schole in his primere.'

Ed.]


[Footnote F: Chaucer's text is:

  'And in a tombe of marble stoones clere
  Enclosed they this litel body swete.'

Ed.]



       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: This was erased in the 'Errata' of 1820, but it
may be reproduced here.--Ed.]




       *       *       *       *       *





THE CUCKOO AND THE NIGHTINGALE


Translated 1801. [A]--Published 1841 [B]




  I        The God of Love--_ah, benedicite!_
           How mighty and how great a Lord is he!
           For he of low hearts can make high, of high
           He can make low, and unto death bring nigh;
           And hard hearts he can make them kind and free. [1]         5

  II       Within a little time, as hath been found,
           He can make sick folk whole and fresh and sound:
           Them who are whole in body and in mind,
           He can make sick,--bind can he and unbind
           All that he will have bound, or have unbound.              10

  III      To tell his might my wit may not suffice;
           Foolish men he can make them out of wise;--
           For he may do all that he will devise;
           Loose livers he can make abate their vice,
           And proud hearts can make tremble in a trice.              15

  IV       In brief, the whole of what he will, he may;
           Against him dare not any wight say nay;
           To humble or afflict whome'er he will,
           To gladden or to grieve, he hath like skill;
           But most his might he sheds on the eve of May.             20

  V        For every true heart, gentle heart and free,
           That with him is, or thinketh so to be,
           Now against May shall have some stirring--whether
           To joy, or be it to some mourning; never
           At other time, methinks, in like degree.                   25

  VI       For now when they may hear the small birds' song,
           And see the budding leaves the branches throng,
           This unto their remembrance doth bring
           All kinds of pleasure mix'd with sorrowing;
           And longing of sweet thoughts that ever long.              30

  VII      And of that longing heaviness doth come,
           Whence oft great sickness grows of heart and home;
           Sick are they all for lack of their desire;
           And thus in May their hearts are set on fire,
           So that they burn forth in great martyrdom.                35

  VIII     In sooth, I speak from feeling, what though now
           Old am I, and to genial pleasure slow;
           Yet have I felt of sickness through the May,
           Both hot and cold, and heart-aches every day,--
           How hard, alas! to bear, I only know.                      40

  IX       Such shaking doth the fever in me keep
           Through all this May that I have little sleep;
           And also 'tis not likely unto me,
           That any living heart should sleepy be
           In which Love's dart its fiery point doth steep.           45

  X        But tossing lately on a sleepless bed,
           I of a token thought which Lovers heed;
           How among them it was a common tale,
           That it was good to hear the Nightingale,
           Ere the vile Cuckoo's note be uttered.                     50

  XI       And then I thought anon as it was day,
           I gladly would go somewhere to essay
           If I perchance a Nightingale might hear,
           For yet had I heard none, of all that year,
           And it was then the third night of the May.                55

  XII      And soon as I a glimpse of day espied,
           No longer would I in my bed abide,
           But straightway to a wood that was hard by,
           Forth did I go, alone and fearlessly,
           And held the pathway down by a brook-side;                 60

  XIII     Till to a lawn I came all white and green,
           I in so fair a one had never been.
           The ground was green, with daisy powdered over;
           Tall were the flowers, the grove a lofty cover,
           All green and white; and nothing else was seen. [C]        65

  XIV      There sate I down among the fair fresh flowers,
           And saw the birds come tripping from their bowers,
           Where they had rested them all night; and they,
           Who were so joyful at the light of day,
           Began to honour May with all their powers.                 70

  XV       Well did they know that service all by rote,
           And there was many and many a lovely note,
           Some, singing loud, as if they had complained;
           Some with their notes another manner feigned;
           And some did sing all out with the full throat.            75

  XVI      They pruned themselves, and made themselves right gay,
           Dancing and leaping light upon the spray;
           And ever two and two together were,
           The same as they had chosen for the year,
           Upon Saint Valentine's returning day.                      80

  XVII     Meanwhile the stream, whose bank I sate upon,
           Was making such a noise as it ran on
           Accordant to the sweet Birds' harmony;
           Methought that it was the best melody
           Which ever to man's ear a passage won.                     85

  XVIII    And for delight, but how I never wot,
           I in a slumber and a swoon was caught,
           Not all asleep and yet not waking wholly;
           And as I lay, the Cuckoo, bird unholy,
           Broke silence, or I heard him in my thought.               90

  XIX      And that was right upon a tree fast by,
           And who was then ill satisfied but I?
           Now, God, quoth I, that died upon the rood,
           From thee and thy base throat, keep all that's good,
           Full little joy have I now of thy cry.                     95

  XX       And, as I with the Cuckoo thus 'gan chide,
           In the next bush that was me fast beside,
           I heard the lusty Nightingale so sing,
           That her clear voice made a loud rioting,
           Echoing through all the green wood wide. [D]              100

  XXI      Ah! good sweet Nightingale! for my heart's cheer,
           Hence hast thou stayed a little while too long;
           For we have had [2] the sorry Cuckoo here,
           And she hath been before thee with her song;
           Evil light on her! she hath done me wrong.                105

  XXII     But hear you now a wondrous thing, I pray;
           As long as in that swooning-fit I lay,
           Methought I wist right well what these birds meant,
           And had good knowing both of their intent,
           And of their speech, and all that they would say.         110

  XXIII    The Nightingale thus in my hearing spake:--
           Good Cuckoo, seek some other bush or brake,
           And, prithee, let us that can sing dwell here;
           For every wight eschews thy song to hear,
           Such uncouth singing verily dost thou make.               115

  XXIV     What! quoth she then, what is't that ails thee now?
           It seems to me I sing as well as thou;
           For mine's a song that is both true and plain,--
           Although I cannot quaver so in vain
           As thou dost in thy throat, I wot not how.                120

  XXV      All men may understanding have of me,
           But, Nightingale, so may they not of thee;
           For thou hast many a foolish and quaint cry:--
           Thou say'st, OSEE, OSEE, then how may I
           Have knowledge, I thee pray, what this may be?            125

  XXVI     Ah, fool! quoth she, wist thou not what it is?
           Oft as I say OSEE, OSEE, I wis,
           Then mean I, that I should be wondrous fain
           That shamefully they one and all were slain,
           Whoever against Love mean aught amiss.                    130

  XXVII    And also would I that they all were dead,
           Who do not think in love their life to lead;
           For who is both the God of Love to obey,
           Is only fit to die, I dare well say,
           And for that cause OSEE I cry; take heed!                 135

  XXVIII   Ay, quoth the Cuckoo, that is a quaint law,
           That all must love or die; but I withdraw,
           And take my leave of all such company,
           For mine intent it neither is to die,
           Nor ever while I live Love's yoke to draw.                140

  XXIX     For lovers of all folk that be alive,
           The most disquiet have and least do thrive;
           Most feeling have of sorrow [3] woe and care,
           And the least welfare cometh to their share;
           What need is there against the truth to strive?           145

  XXX      What! quoth she, thou art all out of thy mind,
           That in thy churlishness a cause canst find
           To speak of Love's true Servants in this mood;
           For in this world no service is so good
           To every wight that gentle is of kind.                    150

  XXXI     For thereof comes all goodness and all worth;
           All gentiless [4] and honour thence come forth;
           Thence worship comes, content and true heart's pleasure,
           And full-assured trust, joy without measure,
           And jollity, fresh cheerfulness, and mirth;               155

  XXXII    And bounty, lowliness, and courtesy,
           And seemliness, and faithful company,
           And dread of shame that will not do amiss;
           For he that faithfully Love's servant is,
           Rather than be disgraced, would chuse to die.             160

  XXXIII   And that the very truth it is which I
           Now say--in such belief I'll live and die;
           And Cuckoo, do thou so, by my advice.
           Then, quoth she, let me never hope for bliss,
           If with that counsel I do e'er comply.                    165

  XXXIV    Good Nightingale! thou speakest wondrous fair,
           Yet for all that, the truth is found elsewhere;
           For Love in young folk is but rage, I wis;
           And Love in old folk a great dotage is;
           Who most it useth, him 'twill most impair.                170

  XXXV     For thereof come all contraries to gladness;
           Thence sickness comes, and overwhelming sadness,
           Mistrust and jealousy, despite, debate,
           Dishonour, shame, envy importunate,
           Pride, anger, mischief, poverty, and madness.             175

  XXXVI    Loving is aye an office of despair,
           And one thing is therein which is not fair;
           For whoso gets of love a little bliss,
           Unless it alway stay with him, I wis
           He may full soon go with an old man's hair.               180

  XXXVII   And, therefore, Nightingale! do thou keep nigh,
           For trust me well, in spite of thy quaint cry,
           If long time from thy mate thou be, or far,
           Thou'lt be as others that forsaken are;
           Then shall thou raise a clamour as do I.                  185

  XXXVIII  Fie, quoth she, on thy name, Bird ill beseen!
           The God of Love afflict thee with all teen,
           For thou art worse than mad a thousand fold;
           For many a one hath virtues manifold,
           Who had been nought, if Love had never been.              190

  XXXIX    For evermore his servants Love amendeth,
           And he from every blemish them defendeth;
           And maketh them to burn, as in a fire,
           In loyalty, and worshipful desire,
           And, when it likes him, joy enough them sendeth.          195

  XL       Thou Nightingale! the Cuckoo said, be still,
           For Love no reason hath but his own will;--
           For to th' untrue he oft gives ease and joy;
           True lovers doth so bitterly annoy,
           He lets them perish through that grievous ill.            200

  XLI      With such a master would I never be; [E]
           For he, in sooth, is blind, and may not see,
           And knows not when he hurts and when he heals;
           Within this court full seldom Truth avails,
           So diverse in his wilfulness is he.                       205

  XLII     Then of the Nightingale did I take note,
           How from her inmost heart a sigh she brought,
           And said, Alas! that ever I was born,
           Not one word have I now, I am so forlorn,--
           And with that word, she into tears burst out.             210

  XLIII    Alas, alas! my very heart will break,
           Quoth she, to hear this churlish bird thus speak
           Of Love, and of his holy services;
           Now, God of Love! thou help me in some wise,
           That vengeance on this Cuckoo I may wreak.                215

  XLIV     And so methought I started up anon,
           And to the brook I ran and got a stone,
           Which at the Cuckoo hardily I cast,
           And he for dread did fly away full fast;
           And glad, in sooth, was I when he was gone.               220

  XLV      And as he flew, the Cuckoo, ever and aye,
           Kept crying, "Farewell!--farewell, Popinjay!"
           As if in scornful mockery of me;
           And on I hunted him from tree to tree,
           Till he was far, all out of sight, away.                  225

  XLVI     Then straightway came the Nightingale to me,
           And said, Forsooth, my friend, do I thank thee,
           That thou wert near to rescue me; and now
           Unto the God of Love I make a vow,
           That all this May I will thy songstress be.               230

  XLVII    Well satisfied, I thanked her, and she said,
           By this mishap no longer be dismayed,
           Though thou the Cuckoo heard, ere thou heard'st me;
           Yet if I live it shall amended be,
           When next May comes, if I am not afraid.                  235

  XLVIII   And one thing will I counsel thee also,
           The Cuckoo trust not thou, nor his Love's saw;
           All that she said is an outrageous lie.
           Nay, nothing shall me bring thereto, quoth I,
           For Love, and it hath done me mighty woe.                 240

  XLIX     Yea, hath it? use, quoth she, this medicine;
           This May-time, every day before thou dine,
           Go look on the fresh daisy; then say I,
           Although for pain thou may'st be like to die,
           Thou wilt be eased, and less wilt droop and pine.         245

  L        And mind always that thou be good and true,
           And I will sing one song, of many new,
           For love of thee, as loud as I may cry;
           And then did she begin this song full high,
           "Beshrew all them that are in love untrue."               250

  LI       And soon as she had sung it to the end,
           Now farewell, quoth she, for I hence must wend;
           And, God of Love, that can right well and may,
           Send unto thee as mickle joy this day,
           As ever he to Lover yet did send.                         255

  LII      Thus takes the Nightingale her leave of me;
           I pray to God with her always to be,
           And joy of love to send her evermore;
           And shield us from the Cuckoo and her lore,
           For there is not so false a bird as she.                  260

  LIII     Forth then she flew, the gentle Nightingale,
           To all the Birds that lodged within that dale,
           And gathered each and all into one place;
           And them besought to hear her doleful case,
           And thus it was that she began her tale.                  265

  LIV      The Cuckoo--'tis not well that I should hide
           How she and I did each the other chide,
           And without ceasing, since it was daylight;
           And now I pray you all to do me right
           Of that false Bird whom Love can not abide.               270

  LV       Then spake one Bird, and full assent all gave;
           This matter asketh counsel good as grave,
           For birds we are--all here together brought;
           And, in good sooth, the Cuckoo here is not;
           And therefore we a Parliament will have.                  275

  LVI      And thereat shall the Eagle be our Lord,
           And other Peers whose names are on record;
           A summons to the Cuckoo shall be sent,
           And judgment there be given; or that intent
           Failing, we finally shall make accord.                    280

  LVII     And all this shall be done, without a nay,
           The morrow after Saint Valentine's day,
           Under a maple that is well beseen,
           Before the chamber-window of the Queen,
           At Woodstock, on the meadow green and gay.                285

  LVIII    She thanked them; and then her leave she took,
           And flew into a hawthorn by that brook;
           And there she sate and sung--upon that tree--
           "For term of life Love shall have hold of me"--
           So loudly, that I with that song awoke.                   290

           Unlearned Book and rude, as well I know,
           For beauty thou hast none, nor eloquence,
           Who did on thee the hardiness bestow
           To appear before my Lady? but a sense
           Thou surely hast of her benevolence,                      295
           Whereof her hourly bearing proof doth give;
           For of all good she is the best alive.

           Alas, poor Book! for thy unworthiness,
           To show to her some pleasant meanings writ
           In winning words, since through her gentiless, [5]        300
           Thee she accepts as for her service fit!
           Oh! it repents me I have neither wit
           Nor leisure unto thee more worth to give;
           For of all good she is the best alive.

           Beseech her meekly with all lowliness,                    305
           Though I be far from her I reverence,
           To think upon my truth and stedfastness,
           And to abridge my sorrow's violence,
           Caused by the wish, as knows your sapience,
           She of her liking proof to me would give;                 310
           For of all good she is the best alive.

L'ENVOY    Pleasure's Aurora, Day of gladsomeness!
           Luna by night, with heavenly influence
           Illumined! root of beauty and goodnesse,
           Write, and allay, by your beneficence,                    315
           My sighs breathed forth in silence,--comfort give!
           Since of all good, you are the best alive.

                           EXPLICIT



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1: In 1819 Wordsworth wrote the opening stanza of his version
of 'The Cuckoo and the Nightingale', in the album of Mrs. Calvert at
Keswick, thus:

  'The God of Love--ah, benedicite!'
  How mighty and how great a Lord is He!
  High can he make the heart that's low and poor,
  And high hearts low--through pains that they endure,
  And hard hearts, He can make them kind and free.

  W. W., Nov. 27, 1819.]


[Variant 2:

1842.

  ... have heard ...     1841.]


[Variant 3:

1842

  ... sorrow's ...     1841.]


[Variant 4:

1842.

  ... gentleness ...    1841.]


[Variant 5:

1842.

  ... gentleness, ...      1841.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The following extracts from Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal
show the date of the composition of this poem.

  "Sunday, 6th December 1801. A very fine beautiful sun-shiny morning.
  William worked a while at Chaucer; then he set forward to walk into
  Easdale.... In the afternoon I read Chaucer aloud."

  "Monday, 7th.... William at work with Chaucer, 'The God of Love'...."

  "8th November ... William worked at 'The Cuckoo and the Nightingale'
  till he was tired."

  "Wednesday, December 9th. I read 'Palemon and Arcite', William writing
  out his alterations of Chaucer's 'Cuckoo and Nightingale'."

The question as to whether 'The Cuckoo and the Nightingale' was written
by Chaucer or not, may be solved either way without affecting the
literary value of Wordsworth's "modernisation" of it.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: In 'The Poems of Geoffrey Chaucer Modernised'.--Ed.]


[Footnote C:

  "In 'The Cuckoo and Nightingale', a poem of the third of May--a date
  corresponding to the mid-May, the very heart of May according to our
  modern reckoning--the poet after a wakeful night rises, and goes forth
  at dawn, and comes to a 'laund' or plain 'of white and green.'

    'So feire oon had I nevere in bene,
    The grounde was grene, y poudred with dayse,
    The floures and the gras ilike al hie,
    Al grene and white, was nothing elles sene.'

  Nothing seen but the short green grass and the white daisies,--grass
  and daisies being of equal height. Unfortunately in Tyrwhitt's text
  the description is nonsensical,

    'The flowres and the greves like hie.'

  The daisy flowers are as high as the _groves_! Wordsworth retained the
  groves, but refused to make daisies of equal height with them.

    'Tall were the flowers, the grove a lofty cover,
    All green and white; and nothing else was seen.'"

(Professor Dowden, in the 'Transactions of the Wordsworth Society'. No.
III.)--Ed.]


[Footnote D:

  "In Chaucer's poem, after 'the cuckoo, bird unholy,' has said his evil
  say, the Nightingale breaks forth 'so lustily,'

    'That with her clere voys she made rynge
    Thro out alle the grene wode wide,'

  Wordsworth has taken a poet's licence with these lines:

    'I heard the lusty Nightingale so sing,
    That her clear voice made 'a loud rioting',
    Echoing through all the green wood wide.'

  This 'loud rioting' is Wordsworth's, not Chaucer's; and it belongs, as
  it were, to that other passage of his:

    'O Nightingale, thou surely art
    A creature of a fiery heart,
    These notes of thine--they pierce and pierce;
    Tumultuous harmony and fierce!
    Thou sing'st as if the God of wine
    Had helped thee to a Valentine.'"

(Professor Dowden, in the 'Transactions of the Wordsworth Society', No.
III.)--Ed.]


[Footnote E: From a manuscript in the Bodleian, as are also stanzas 44
and 45--W. W.

(1841), which are necessary to complete the sense--W. W. (added in
1842).]



       *       *       *       *       *





TROILUS AND CRESIDA


Translated 1801.--Published 1841 [A]




  Next morning Troilus began to clear
  His eyes from sleep, at the first break of day,
  And unto Pandarus, his own Brother dear,
  For love of God, full piteously did say,
  We must the Palace see of Cresida;                              5
  For since we yet may have no other feast,
  Let us behold her Palace at the least!

  And therewithal to cover his intent
  A cause he found into the Town to go, [B]
  And they right forth to Cresid's Palace went;                  10
  But, Lord, this simple Troilus was woe,
  Him thought his sorrowful heart would break [1] in two;
  For when he saw her doors fast bolted all,
  Well nigh for sorrow down he 'gan to fall.

  Therewith when this true Lover 'gan behold,                    15
  How shut was every window of the place,
  Like frost he thought his heart was icy cold;
  For which, with changed, pale, and deadly face,
  Without word uttered, forth he 'gan to pace;
  And on his purpose bent so fast to ride,                       20
  That no wight his continuance espied. [C]

  Then said he thus,--O Palace desolate!
  O house of houses, once so richly dight!
  O Palace empty and disconsolate!
  Thou lamp of which extinguished is the light;                  25
  O Palace whilom day that now art night,
  Thou ought'st to fall and I to die; since she
  Is gone who held us both in sovereignty.

  O, of all houses once the crowned boast!
  Palace illumined with the sun of bliss;                        30
  O ring of which the ruby now is lost,
  O cause of woe, that cause has [2] been of bliss:
  Yet, since I may no better, would I kiss
  Thy cold doors; but I dare not for this rout;
  Farewell, thou shrine of which the Saint is out!               35

  Therewith he cast on Pandarus an eye, [3]
  With changed face, and piteous to behold;
  And when he might his time aright espy,
  Aye as he rode, to Pandarus he told
  Both his new sorrow and his joys of old,                       40
  So piteously, and with so dead a hue,
  That every wight might on his sorrow rue.

  Forth from the spot he rideth up and down,
  And everything to his rememberance
  Came as he rode by places of the town                          45
  Where he had felt such perfect pleasure once.
  Lo, yonder saw I mine own Lady dance,
  And in that Temple she with her bright eyes,
  My Lady dear, first bound me captive-wise.

  And yonder with joy-smitten heart have I                       50
  Heard my own Cresid's laugh; and once at play
  I yonder saw her eke full blissfully;
  And yonder once she unto me 'gan say--
  Now, my sweet Troilus, love me well, I pray!
  And there so graciously did me behold,                         55
  That hers unto the death my heart I hold.

  And at the corner of that self-same house
  Heard I my most beloved Lady dear,
  So womanly, with voice melodious
  Singing so well, so goodly, and so clear,                      60
  That in my soul methinks I yet do hear
  The blissful sound; and in that very place
  My Lady first me took unto her grace.

  O blissful God of Love! then thus he cried,
  When I the process have in memory,                             65
  How thou hast wearied [D] me on every side,
  Men thence a book might make, a history;
  What need to seek a conquest over me,
  Since I am wholly at thy will? what joy
  Hast thou thy own liege subjects to destroy?                   70

  Dread Lord! so fearful when provoked, thine ire
  Well hast thou wreaked on me by pain and grief;
  Now mercy, Lord! thou know'st well I desire
  Thy grace above all pleasures first and chief;
  And live and die I will in thy belief;                         75
  For which I ask for guerdon but one boon,
  That Cresida again thou send me soon.

  Constrain her heart as quickly to return,
  As thou dost mine with longing her to see,
  Then know I well that she would not sojourn.                   80
  Now, blissful Lord, so cruel do not be
  Unto the blood of Troy, I pray of thee,
  As Juno was unto the Theban blood,
  From whence to Thebes came griefs in multitude.

  And after this he to the gate did go                           85
  Whence Cresid rode, as if in haste she was;
  And up and down there went, and to and fro,
  And to himself full oft he said, alas!
  From hence my hope, and solace forth did pass.
  O would the blissful God now for his joy,                      90
  I might her see again coming to Troy!

  And up to yonder hill was I her guide;
  Alas, and there I took of her my leave;
  Yonder I saw her to her Father ride,
  For very grief of which my heart shall cleave;--95
  And hither home I came when it was eve;
  And here I dwell an outcast from all joy,
  And shall, unless I see her soon in Troy.

  And of himself did he imagine oft,
  That he was blighted, pale, and waxen less                    100
  Than he was wont; and that in whispers soft
  Men said, what may it be, can no one guess
  Why Troilus hath all this heaviness?
  All which he of himself conceited wholly
  Out of his weakness and his melancholy.                       105

  Another time he took into his head,
  That every wight, who in the way passed by,
  Had of him ruth, and fancied that they said,
  I am right sorry Troilus will die:
  And thus a day or two drove wearily;                          110
  As ye have heard; such life 'gan he to lead
  As one that standeth betwixt hope and dread.

  For which it pleased him in his songs to show
  The occasion of his woe, as best he might;
  And made a fitting song, of words [4] but few,                115
  Somewhat his woeful heart to make more light;
  And when he was removed from all men's sight,
  With a soft night voice, [5] he of his Lady dear,
  That absent was, 'gan sing as ye may hear.

  O star, of which I lost have all the light,                   120
  With a sore heart well ought I to bewail,
  That ever dark in torment, night by night,
  Toward my death with wind I steer and sail; [E]
  For which upon the tenth night if thou fail
  With thy bright beams to guide me but one hour,               125
  My ship and me Charybdis will devour.

  As soon as he this song had thus sung through,
  He fell again into his sorrows old;
  And every night, as was his wont to do,
  Troilus stood the bright moon to behold;                      130
  And all his trouble to the moon he told,
  And said; I wis, when thou art horn'd anew,
  I shall be glad if all the world be true.

  Thy horns were old as now upon that morrow,
  When hence did journey my bright Lady dear,                   135
  That cause is of my torment and my sorrow;
  For which, oh, gentle Luna, bright and clear,
  For love of God, run fast above [F] thy sphere;
  For when thy horns begin once more to spring,
  Then shall she come, that with her bliss may bring.           140

  The day is more, and longer every night
  Than they were wont to be--for he thought so;
  And that the sun did take his course not right,
  By longer way than he was wont to go;
  And said, I am in constant dread I trow,                      145
  That Phaeton his son is yet alive,
  His too fond father's car amiss to drive.

  Upon the walls fast also would he walk,
  To the end that he the Grecian host might see;
  And ever thus he to himself would talk:--150
  Lo! yonder is my [6] own bright Lady free;
  Or yonder is it that the tents must be;
  And thence does come this air which is so sweet,
  That in my soul I feel the joy of it.

  And certainly this wind, that more and more                   155
  By moments thus increaseth in my face,
  Is of my Lady's sighs heavy and sore;
  I prove it thus; for in no other space
  Of all this town, save only in this place,
  Feel I a wind, that soundeth so like pain;                    160
  It saith, Alas, why severed are we twain?

  A weary while in pain he tosseth thus,
  Till fully past and gone was the ninth night;
  And ever [7] at his side stood Pandarus,
  Who busily made use of all his might                          165
  To comfort him, and make his heart more light; [8]
  Giving him always hope, that she the morrow
  Of the tenth day will come, and end his sorrow.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1842.

  ... burst      1841.]


[Variant 2:

1842.

  ... hast ...     1841.]


[Variant 3:

1842.

  ... his eye,     1841.]


[Variant 4:

1842.

  ... whose words ...      1841.]


[Variant 5:

1842.

  With a soft voice, ...     1841.]


[Variant 6:

1842.

  ... mine ...     1841.]


[Variant 7: The "even" of 1841 is evidently a misprint.]


[Variant 8:

1842.

  ... too light;     1841.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In 'The Poems of Geoffrey Chaucer Modernised'. It is an
extract from 'Troilus and Cressida', book v. ll. 518-686.--Ed.]


[Footnote B:

  "Chaucer's text is:

    'And therwithalle his meynye for to blende
    A cause he fonde in toune for to go.'

  'His meynye for to blende,' i. e. to keep his household or his
  domestics in the dark. But Wordsworth writes:

    'And therewithal to cover his _intent_,'

  possibly mistaking 'meynye' for 'meaning'."

(Professor Dowden, in the 'Transactions of the Wordsworth Society', No.
III.)--Ed.]


[Footnote C:

  "When Troilus sees the shut windows and desolate aspect of his lady's
  house, his face grows blanched, and he rides past in haste, so fast,
  says Wordsworth,

    'That no wight his continuance espied.'

  But in Chaucer he rides fast that his white face may not be noticed:

    'And as God wolde he gan so faste ride
    That no wight of his countenance espied.'"

(Professor Dowden, in the 'Transactions of the Wordsworth Society', No.
III.)--Ed.]


[Footnote D: In Chaucer "werreyed" = warred on = fought against.--Ed.]


[Footnote E:

    "'Toward my death with wind I steer and sail.'

  This is Urry's version, but Chaucer's text is,

    'Toward my death, with wind _in stern_ I sail,'

  Troilus' bark careering towards death, with all sails set, before a
  fierce stern-wind."

(Professor Dowden, in the 'Transactions of the Wordsworth Society', No.
III.)--Ed.]


[Footnote F: In Chaucer "aboute" = around.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





1802


The Lyrical Ballads and Sonnets which follow were written
in 1802; but during that year Wordsworth continued mainly to
work at 'The Excursion', as the following extracts from his sister's
Journal indicate:

  "Feb. 1, 1802.--William worked hard at 'The Pedlar,' and tired
  himself.

  2nd Feb.--Wm. worked at 'The Pedlar.' I read aloud the 11th book of
  'Paradise Lost'.

  Thursday, 4th.--William thought a little about 'The Pedlar.'

  5th.--Wm. sate up late at 'The Pedlar.'

  7th.--W. was working at his poem. Wm. read 'The Pedlar,' thinking it
  was done. But lo! ... it was uninteresting, and must be altered."

Similar records occur each day in the Journal from the 10th to the 14th
Feb. 1802.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE SAILOR'S MOTHER


Composed March 11th and 12th, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written in Town-end, Grasmere. I met this woman near the Wishing-gate,
on the high road that then led from Grasmere to Ambleside. Her
appearance was exactly as here described, and such was her account,
nearly to the letter.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  One morning (raw it was and wet--
  A foggy day in winter time)
  A Woman on [1] the road I met,
  Not old, though something past her prime:
  Majestic in her person, tall and straight;                        5
  And like a Roman matron's was her mien and gait.

  The ancient spirit is not dead;
  Old times, thought I, are breathing there;
  Proud was I that my country bred
  Such strength, a dignity so fair:                                10
  She begged an alms, like one in poor estate;
  I looked at her again, nor did my pride abate.

  When from these lofty thoughts I woke,
  "What is it," said I, "that you bear,
  Beneath the covert of your Cloak,                                15
  Protected from this cold damp air?" [2]
  She answered, soon as she the question heard,
  "A simple burthen, Sir, a little Singing-bird."

  And, thus continuing, she said,
  "I had a Son, who many a day                                     20
  Sailed on the seas, but he is dead; [3]
  In Denmark he was cast away:
  And I have travelled weary miles to see
  If aught which he had owned might still remain for me. [4]

  "The bird and cage they both were his:                           25
  'Twas my Son's bird; and neat and trim
  He kept it: many voyages
  The singing-bird had gone [5] with him;
  When last he sailed, he left the bird behind;
  From bodings, as might be, that hung upon his mind. [6]          30

  "He to a fellow-lodger's care
  Had left it, to be watched and fed,
  And pipe its song in safety;--there [7]
  I found it when my Son was dead;
  And now, God help me for my little wit!                          35
  I bear [8] it with me, Sir;--he took so much delight in it."



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  ... in ...     1807.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  ... I woke,
  With the first word I had to spare
  I said to her, "Beneath your Cloak
  What's that which on your arm you bear?"     1807.

  "What treasure," said I,"do you bear,
  Beneath the covert of your Cloak
  Protected from the cold damp air?"           1820.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  "I had a Son,--the waves might roar,
  He feared them not, a Sailor gay!
  But he will cross the waves no more:     1820.

  ... cross the deep ...                   1827.

The text of 1832 returns to that of 1807. [a]]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  And I have been as far as Hull, to see
  What clothes he might have left, or other property.     1807.

  And I have travelled far as Hull, to see                1815.

  And I have travelled many miles to see
  If aught which he had owned might still remain for me.  1820.]


[Variant 5:

1845.

  This Singing-bird hath gone ...     1807.

  ... had gone ...                    1820.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  As it might be, perhaps, from bodings of his mind.     1807.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

  Till he came back again; and there     1807.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

  I trail ...     1807.]




       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: This return, in 1832, to the original text of the poem
was due to Barren Field's criticism, the justice of which Wordsworth
admitted.--Ed.]


In the Wordsworth household this poem went by the name
of "The Singing Bird" as well as 'The Sailor's Mother'.

  "Thursday (March 11th).--A fine morning. William worked at the poem of
  'The Singing Bird.' ..."

  "Friday (March 12th).--William finished his poem of 'The Singing
  Bird.'"


(Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





ALICE FELL; OR, POVERTY [A]


Composed March 12th and 13th, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written to gratify Mr. Graham of Glasgow, brother of the author of 'The
Sabbath'. He was a zealous coadjutor of Mr. Clarkson, and a man of
ardent humanity. The incident had happened to himself, and he urged me
to put it into verse, for humanity's sake. The humbleness, meanness if
you like, of the subject, together with the homely mode of treating it,
brought upon me a world of ridicule by the small critics, so that in
policy I excluded it from many editions of my poems, till it was
restored at the request of some of my friends, in particular my
son-in-law, Edward Quillinan.--I.F.]

It was only excluded from the editions of 1820, 1827, and 1832. In the
edition of 1807 it was placed amongst a group of "Poems composed during
a Tour, chiefly on foot." In 1815, in 1836, and afterwards, it was
included in the group "referring to the Period of Childhood."

In Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal, the following reference to
this poem occurs:

  "Feb. 16, 1802.--Mr. Graham said he wished William had been with him
  the other day. He was riding in a post-chaise, and he heard a strange
  cry that he could not understand. The sound continued, and he called
  to the chaise-driver to stop. It was a little girl that was crying as
  if her heart would burst. She had got up behind the chaise, and her
  cloak had been caught by the wheel, and was jammed in, and it hung
  there. She was crying after it, poor thing. Mr. Graham took her into
  the chaise, and her cloak was released from the wheel, but the child's
  misery did not cease, for her cloak was torn to rags. It had been a
  miserable cloak before; but she had no other, and it was the greatest
  sorrow that could befall her. Her name was Alice Fell. She had no
  parents, and belonged to the next town. At the next town Mr. G. left
  money to buy her a new cloak."

  "Friday (March 12).--In the evening after tea William wrote 'Alice
  Fell'."

  "Saturday Morning (13th March).--William finished 'Alice Fell'...."

Ed.




  The post-boy drove with fierce career,
  For threatening clouds the moon had drowned;
  When, as we hurried on, my ear
  Was smitten with a startling sound. [1]

  As if the wind blew many ways,                               5
  I heard the sound,--and more and more;
  It seemed to follow with the chaise,
  And still I heard it as before.

  At length I to the boy called out;
  He stopped his horses at the word,                          10
  But neither cry, nor voice, nor shout,
  Nor aught else like it, could be heard.

  The boy then smacked his whip, and fast
  The horses scampered through the rain;
  But, hearing soon upon the blast                            15
  The cry, I bade him halt again. [2]

  Forthwith alighting on the ground,
  "Whence comes," said I, "this piteous moan?" [3]
  And there a little Girl I found,
  Sitting behind the chaise, alone.                           20

  "My cloak!" no other word she spake,
  But loud and bitterly she wept,
  As if her innocent heart would break; [4]
  And down from off her seat [5] she leapt.

  "What ails you, child?"--she sobbed "Look here!"            25
  I saw it in the wheel entangled,
  A weather-beaten rag as e'er
  From any garden scare-crow dangled.

  There, twisted between nave and spoke,
  It hung, nor could at once be freed;                        30
  But our joint pains unloosed the cloak, [6]
  A miserable rag indeed! [7]

  "And whither are you going, child,
  To-night along these lonesome ways?"
  "To Durham," answered she, half wild--35
  "Then come with me into the chaise."

  Insensible to all relief
  Sat the poor girl, and forth did send
  Sob after sob, as if her grief [8]
  Could never, never have an end.                             40

  "My child, in Durham do you dwell?"
  She checked herself in her distress,
  And said, "My name is Alice Fell;
  I'm fatherless and motherless.

  "And I to Durham, Sir, belong."                             45
  Again, [9] as if the thought would choke
  Her very heart, her grief grew strong;
  And all was for her tattered cloak!

  The chaise drove on; our journey's end
  Was nigh; and, sitting by my side,                          50
  As if she had lost [10] her only friend
  She wept, nor would be pacified.

  Up to the tavern-door we post;
  Of Alice and her grief I told;
  And I gave money to the host,                               55
  To buy a new cloak for the old.

  "And let it be of duffil grey,
  As warm a cloak as man can sell!"
  Proud creature was she the next day,
  The little orphan, Alice Fell!                              60



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  When suddenly I seem'd to hear
  A moan, a lamentable sound.      1807.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  And soon I heard upon the blast
  The voice, and bade ....      1807.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  Said I, alighting on the ground,
  "What can it be, this piteous moan?"      1807.

  Forthwith alighted on the ground
  To learn what voice the piteous moan
  Had made, a little girl I found,      C.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  "My Cloak!" the word was last and first,
  And loud and bitterly she wept,
  As if her very heart would burst;       1807.

  "My cloak, my cloak" she cried, and spake
  No other word, but loudly wept,            C.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  ... off the Chaise ...      1807.]


[Variant 6:

1845.

  'Twas twisted betwixt nave and spoke;
  Her help she lent, and with good heed
  Together we released the Cloak;      1807.

  ... between ...      1840.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

  A wretched, wretched rag indeed!      1807.]


[Variant 8:

1845.

  She sate like one past all relief;
  Sob after sob she forth did send
  In wretchedness, as if her grief      1807.]


[Variant 9:

1836.

  And then, ...      1807.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  ... she'd lost ...     1807.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: There was no sub-title in the edition of 1807.--Ed.]



Charles Lamb wrote to Wordsworth in 1815, referring to
the revisions of this and other poems:

  "I am glad that you have not sacrificed a verse to those scoundrels. I
  would not have had you offer up the poorest rag that lingered upon the
  stript shoulders of little Alice Fell, to have atoned all their
  malice; I would not have given 'em a red cloak to save their souls."

See 'Letters of Charles Lamb' (Ainger), vol. i. p. 283.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





BEGGARS


Composed March 13th and 14th, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. Met, and described to me by my sister,
near the quarry at the head of Rydal Lake, [A] a place still a chosen
resort of vagrants travelling with their families.--I.F.]

The following are Dorothy Wordsworth's references to this poem in her
Grasmere Journal. They justify the remark of the late Bishop of Lincoln,

  "his poems are sometimes little more than poetical versions of her
  descriptions of the objects which she had seen, _and he treated them
  as seen by himself_."

(See
'Memoirs of Wordsworth', vol. i. pp. 180-1.)

  "Saturday (March 13, 1802).--William wrote the poem of the Beggar
  Woman, taken from a woman whom I had seen in May (now nearly two years
  ago), when John and he were at Gallow Hill. I sat with him at
  intervals all the morning, and took down his stanzas. After tea I read
  W. the account I had written of the little boy belonging to the tall
  woman: and an unlucky thing it was, for he could not escape from those
  very words, and so he could not write the poem. He left it unfinished,
  and went tired to bed. In our walk from Rydal he had got warmed with
  the subject, and had half cast the poem."

  "Sunday Morning (March 14).--William had slept badly. He got up at 9
  o'clock, but before he rose he had finished the Beggar Boy."

The following is the "account" written in her Journal on Tuesday, May
23, 1800:

  "A very tall woman, tall much beyond the measure of tall women, called
  at the door. She had on a very long brown cloak, and a very white cap,
  without bonnet. Her face was brown, but it had plainly once been fair.
  She led a little barefooted child about two years old by the hand, and
  said her husband, who was a tinker, was gone before with the other
  children. I gave her a piece of bread. Afterwards, on my road to
  Ambleside, beside the bridge at Rydal, I saw her husband sitting at
  the roadside, his two asses standing beside him, and the two young
  children at play upon the grass. The man did not beg. I passed on, and
  about a quarter of a mile farther I saw two boys before me, one about
  ten, the other about eight years old, at play, chasing a butterfly.
  They were wild figures, not very ragged, but without shoes and
  stockings. The hat of the elder was wreathed round with yellow
  flowers; the younger, whose hat was only a rimless crown, had stuck it
  round with laurel leaves. They continued at play till I drew very
  near, and then they addressed me with the begging cant and the whining
  voice of sorrow. I said, 'I served your mother this morning' (the boys
  were so like the woman who had called at our door that I could not be
  mistaken). 'O,' says the elder, 'you could not serve my mother, for
  she's dead, and my father's in at the next town; he's a potter.' I
  persisted in my assertion, and that I would give them nothing. Says
  the elder, 'Come, let's away,' and away they flew like lightning. They
  had, however, sauntered so long in their road that they did not reach
  Ambleside before me, and I saw them go up to Mathew Harrison's house
  with their wallet upon the elder's shoulder, and creeping with a
  beggar's complaining foot. On my return through Ambleside I met, in
  the street, the mother driving her asses, in the two panniers of one
  of which were the two little children, whom she was chiding and
  threatening with a wand with which she used to drive on her asses,
  while the little things hung in wantonness over the pannier's edge.
  The woman had told me in the morning that she was of Scotland, which
  her accent fully proved, and that she had lived (I think at Wigtown);
  that they could not keep a house, and so they travelled."

This was one of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  She had a tall man's height or more;
  Her face from summer's noontide heat
  No bonnet shaded, but she wore
  A mantle, to her very feet
  Descending with a graceful flow,                                   5
  And on her head a cap as white as new-fallen snow. [1]

  Her skin was of Egyptian brown:
  Haughty, as if her eye had seen
  Its own light to a distance thrown,
  She towered, fit person for a Queen [2]                           10
  To lead [3] those ancient Amazonian files;
  Or ruling Bandit's wife among the Grecian isles.

  Advancing, forth she stretched her hand
  And begged an alms with doleful plea
  That ceased not; on our English land                              15
  Such woes, I knew, could never be; [4]
  And yet a boon I gave her, for the creature
  Was beautiful to see--a weed of glorious feature. [B]

  I left her, and pursued my way;
  And soon before me did espy                                       20
  A pair of little Boys at play,
  Chasing a crimson butterfly;
  The taller followed with his hat in hand,
  Wreathed round with yellow flowers the gayest of the land. [5]

  The other wore a rimless crown                                    25
  With leaves of laurel stuck about;
  And, while both [6] followed up and down,
  Each whooping with a merry shout,
  In their fraternal features I could trace
  Unquestionable lines of that wild Suppliant's face. [7]           30

  Yet _they_, so blithe of heart, seemed fit [8]
  For finest tasks of earth or air:
  Wings let them have, and they might flit
  Precursors to [9] Aurora's car,
  Scattering fresh flowers; though happier far, I ween,             35
  To hunt their fluttering game o'er rock and level green.

  They dart across my path--but lo, [10]
  Each ready with a plaintive whine!
  Said I, "not half an hour ago
  Your Mother has had alms of mine."                                40
  "That cannot be," one answered--"she is dead:"--
  I looked reproof--they saw--but neither hung his head. [11]

  "She has been dead, Sir, many a day."--
  "Hush, boys! you're telling me a lie; [12]
  It was your Mother, as I say!"                                    45
  And, in the twinkling of an eye,
  "Come! come!" cried one, and without more ado,
  Off to some other play the joyous Vagrants flew! [13] [C]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  She had a tall Man's height, or more;
  No bonnet screen'd her from the heat;
  A long drab-colour'd Cloak she wore,
  A Mantle reaching to her feet:
  What other dress she had I could not know;
  Only she wore a Cap that was as white as snow.       1807.

  Before me as the Wanderer stood,
  No bonnet screened her from the heat;
  Nor claimed she service from the hood
  Of a blue mantle, to her feet
  Depending with a graceful flow;
  Only she wore a cap pure as unsullied snow.          1827.

  Before my eyes a Wanderer stood;
  Her face from summer's noon-day heat
  Nor bonnet shaded, nor the hood
  Of that blue cloak which to her feet
  Depended with a graceful flow;
  Only she wore a cap as white as new-fallen snow.     1832.

  No bonnet shaded, nor the hood
  Of the blue cloak ...                                1836.

  She had a tall man's height or more;
  And while, 'mid April's noontide heat,
  A long blue cloak the vagrant wore,
  A mantle reaching to her feet,
  No bonnet screened her lofty brow,
  Only she wore a cap as white as new-fallen snow.      C.

  She had a tall man's height or more;
  A garment for her stature meet,
  And for a vagrant life, she wore
  A mantle reaching to her feet.
  Nor hood, nor bonnet screened her lofty brow,         C.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  In all my walks, through field or town,
  Such Figure had I never seen:
  Her face was of Egyptian brown:
  Fit person was she for a Queen,      1807.

  Such figure had I never seen
  In all my walks through field or town,
  Fit person seemed she for a Queen,      C.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  To head ...     1807.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

  Before me begging did she stand,
  Pouring out sorrows like a sea;
  Grief after grief:--on English Land
  Such woes I knew could never be;      1807.

  Her suit no faltering scruples checked;
  Forth did she pour, in current free,
  Tales that could challenge no respect
  But from a blind credulity;           1827.

  She begged an alms; no scruple checked
  The current of her ready plea,
  Words that could challenge ...        1832.

  Before me begging did she stand
  And boldly urged a doleful plea,
  Grief after grief, on English land
  Such woes I knew could never be.         C.]


[Variant 5:

1807.

  With yellow flowers around, as with a golden band.     C.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  And they both ...     1807.]


[Variant 7:

1820.

  Two Brothers seem'd they, eight and ten years old;
  And like that Woman's face as gold is like to gold.     1807.]


[Variant 8: This stanza was added in the edition of 1827.]


[Variant 9:

1836.

  Precursors of ...     1827.]


[Variant 10:

1827.

  They bolted on me thus, and lo!      1807.]


[Variant 11:

1827.

  "Nay but I gave her pence, and she will buy you bread."    1807.]


[Variant 12:

1845.

  "Sweet Boys, you're telling me a lie;    1807.

  ... Heaven hears that rash reply;        1827.

The text of 1807 was resumed in 1836.]


[Variant 13:

1827.

  ... they both together flew.       1807.

  ... the thoughtless vagrants flew.    C.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The spot is easily identified, as the quarry still
exists.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: In the MS. of this poem (1807) the words, "a weed of
glorious feature," are placed within inverted commas. The quotation is
from Spenser's 'Muiopotmos' ('The Fate of the Butterflie'), stanza 27;
and is important, as it affects the meaning of the phrase. It is curious
that Wordsworth dropped the commas in his subsequent editions.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: In Wordsworth's letter to Barron Field, of 24th October
1828 (see the volumes containing his correspondence), a detailed account
is given of the reasons which had led him to alter the text of this
poem.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





SEQUEL TO THE FOREGOING,

COMPOSED MANY YEARS AFTER


Composed 1817.--Published 1827


In the edition of 1840 the year assigned to this Sequel is 1817. It does
not occur in the edition of 1820, but was first published in 1827. It
was one of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  Where are they now, those wanton Boys?
  For whose free range the daedal earth
  Was filled with animated toys,
  And implements of frolic mirth;
  With tools for ready wit to guide;                            5
  And ornaments of seemlier pride,
  More fresh, more bright, than princes wear;
  For what one moment flung aside,
  Another could repair;
  What good or evil have they seen                             10
  Since I their pastime witnessed here,
  Their daring wiles, their sportive cheer?
  I ask--but all is dark between!
  [1]

  They met me in a genial hour,
  When universal nature breathed                               15
  As with the breath of one sweet flower,--
  A time to overrule the power
  Of discontent, and check the birth
  Of thoughts with better thoughts at strife,
  The most familiar bane of life                               20
  Since parting Innocence bequeathed
  Mortality to Earth!
  Soft clouds, the whitest of the year,
  Sailed through the sky--the brooks ran clear;
  The lambs from rock to rock were bounding;                   25
  With songs the budded groves resounding;
  And to my heart are still endeared
  The thoughts with which it then was cheered; [2]
  The faith which saw that gladsome pair
  Walk through the fire with unsinged hair.                    30
  Or, if such faith [3] must needs deceive--
  Then, Spirits of beauty and of grace, [A]
  Associates in that eager chase;
  Ye, who within the blameless mind
  Your favourite seat of empire find--35
  Kind Spirits! may we not believe
  That they, so happy and so fair
  Through your sweet influence, and the care
  Of pitying Heaven, at least were free
  From touch of _deadly_ injury?                               40
  Destined, whate'er their earthly doom,
  For mercy and immortal bloom?



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

  Spirits of beauty and of grace!
  Associates in that eager chase;
  Ye, by a course to nature true,
  The sterner judgment can subdue;
  And waken a relenting smile
  When she encounters fraud or guile;
  And sometimes ye can charm away
  The inward mischief, or allay,
  Ye, who within the blameless mind
  Your favourite seat of empire find!

The above is a separate stanza in the editions of 1827 and 1832. Only
the first two and the last two lines of this stanza were retained in the
edition of 1836, and were then transferred to the place they occupy in
the final text.--Ed.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  And to my heart is still endeared
  The faith with which ...    1827.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  ... such thoughts ...    1827.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This and the three following lines were placed here in the
edition of 1836. See note to the previous page.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TO A BUTTERFLY (#1)


Composed March 14, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written in the Orchard, Town-end, Grasmere. My sister and I were parted
immediately after the death of our mother, who died in 1778, both being
very young.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.




  Stay near me--do not take thy flight!
  A little longer stay in sight!
  Much converse do I find in thee,
  Historian of my infancy!
  Float near me; do not yet depart!                         5
  Dead times revive in thee:
  Thou bring'st, gay creature as thou art!
  A solemn image to my heart,
  My father's family!

  Oh! pleasant, pleasant were the days,                    10
  The time, when, in our childish plays,
  My sister Emmeline [A] and I
  Together chased the butterfly!
  A very hunter did I rush
  Upon the prey:--with leaps and springs                   15
  I followed on from brake to bush;
  But she, God love her! feared to brush
  The dust from off its wings.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In the MS. for the edition of 1807 the transcriber (not W.
W.) wrote "Dorothy." This, Wordsworth erased, putting in
"Emmeline."--Ed.]


The text of this poem was never changed. It refers to days of childhood
spent at Cockermouth before 1778. "My sister Emmeline" is Dorothy
Wordsworth. In her Grasmere Journal, of Sunday, March 14, 1802, the
following occurs:

  "While we were at breakfast he" (William) "wrote the poem 'To a
  Butterfly'. He ate not a morsel, but sate with his shirt neck
  unbuttoned, and his waistcoat open when he did it. The thought first
  came upon him as we were talking about the pleasure we both always
  felt at the sight of a butterfly. I told him that I used to chase them
  a little, but that I was afraid of brushing the dust off their wings,
  and did not catch them. He told me how he used to kill all the white
  ones when he went to school, because they were Frenchmen. Mr. Simpson
  came in just as he was finishing the poem. After he was gone, I wrote
  it down, and the other poems, and I read them all over to him....
  William began to try to alter 'The Butterfly', and tired himself."

Compare the later poem 'To a Butterfly' (#2) (April 20), p. 297.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE EMIGRANT MOTHER


Composed March 16th and 17th, 1802.--Published 1807


[Suggested by what I have noticed in more than one French fugitive
during the time of the French Revolution. If I am not mistaken the lines
were composed at Sockburn when I was on a visit to Mary and her
brothers.--I. F.]

In the editions of 1807 and 1815, this poem had no distinctive title;
but in the Wordsworth circle, it was known from the year 1802 as 'The
Emigrant Mother', and at least one copy was transcribed with this title
in 1802. It was first published under that name in 1820. It was revised
and altered in 1820, 1827, 1832, 1836, and more especially in 1845.

In Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal the following entries occur:

  "Tuesday (March 16).--William went up into the orchard, and wrote a
  part of 'The Emigrant Mother'."

  "Wednesday.--William went up into the orchard, and finished the
  poem.... I went and sate with W., and walked backwards and forwards in
  the orchard till dinner-time. He read me his poem."

This poem was included among those "founded on the Affections."--Ed.




           Once in a lonely hamlet I sojourned
           In which a Lady driven from France did dwell;
           The big and lesser griefs with which she mourned,
           In friendship she to me would often tell.

           This Lady, [1] dwelling upon British [2] ground,            5
           Where she was childless, daily would [3] repair
           To a poor neighbouring cottage; as I found,
           For sake of a young Child whose home was there.

           Once having seen her clasp with fond embrace
           This Child, I chanted to myself a lay,                     10
           Endeavouring, in our English tongue, to trace
           Such things as she unto the Babe might say: [4]
           And thus, from what I heard and knew, or guessed, [5]
           My song the workings of her heart expressed.

  I        "Dear Babe, thou daughter of another,                      15
           One moment let me be thy mother!
           An infant's face and looks are thine
           And sure a mother's heart is mine:
           Thy own dear mother's far away,
           At labour in the harvest field:                            20
           Thy little sister is at play;--
           What warmth, what comfort would it yield
           To my poor heart, if thou wouldst be
           One little hour a child to me!

  II       "Across the waters I am come,                              25
           And I have left a babe at home:
           A long, long way of land and sea!
           Come to me--I'm no enemy:
           I am the same who at thy side
           Sate yesterday, and made a nest                            30
           For thee, sweet Baby!--thou hast tried,
           Thou know'st the pillow of my breast;
           Good, good art thou:--alas! to me
           Far more than I can be to thee.

  III      "Here, little Darling, dost thou lie;                      35
           An infant thou, a mother I!
           Mine wilt thou be, thou hast no fears;
           Mine art thou--spite of these my tears.
           Alas! before I left the spot,
           My baby and its dwelling-place;                            40
           The nurse said to me, 'Tears should not
           Be shed upon an infant's face,
           It was unlucky'--no, no, no;
           No truth is in them who say so!

  IV       "My own dear Little-one will sigh,                         45
           Sweet Babe! and they will let him die.
           'He pines,' they'll say, 'it is his doom,
           And you may see his hour is come.'
           Oh! had he but thy cheerful smiles,
           Limbs stout as thine, and lips as gay,                     50
           Thy looks, thy cunning, and thy wiles,
           And countenance like a summer's day,
           They would have hopes of him;--and then
           I should behold his face again!

  V        "'Tis gone--like dreams that we forget;                    55
           There was a smile or two--yet--yet [6]
           I can remember them, I see
           The smiles, worth all the world to me.
           Dear Baby! I must lay thee down;
           Thou troublest me with strange alarms;                     60
           Smiles hast thou, bright [7] ones of thy own;
           I cannot keep thee in my arms;
           For they confound me;--where--where is
           That last, that sweetest smile of his? [8]

  VI       "Oh! how I love thee!--we will stay                        65
           Together here this one half day.
           My sister's child, who bears my name,
           From France to sheltering England came; [9]
           She with her mother crossed the sea;
           The babe and mother near me dwell:                         70
           Yet does my yearning heart to thee
           Turn rather, though I love her well: [10]
           Rest, little Stranger, rest thee here!
           Never was any child more dear!

  VII      "--I cannot help it; ill intent                            75
           I've none, my pretty Innocent!
           I weep--I know they do thee wrong,
           These tears--and my poor idle tongue.
           Oh, what a kiss was that! my cheek
           How cold it is! but thou art good; So                      80
           Thine eyes are on me--they would speak,
           I think, to help me if they could.  [11]
           Blessings upon that soft, warm face, [12]
           My heart again is in its place!

VIII

           "While thou art mine, my little Love,                      85
           This cannot be a sorrowful grove;
           Contentment, hope, and mother's glee, [13]
           I seem to find them all in thee: [14]
           Here's grass to play with, here are flowers;
           I'll call thee by my darling's name;                       90
           Thou hast, I think, a look of ours,
           Thy features seem to me the same;
           His little sister thou shalt be;
           And, when once more my home I see,
           I'll tell him many tales of Thee."                         95


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  This Mother ...      MS.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  ... English ...      1807.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  ... did ...     1807.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

  Once did I see her clasp the Child about,
  And take it to herself; and I, next day,
  Wish'd in my native tongue to fashion out
  Such things as she unto this Child might say:      1807.

  Once did I see her take with fond embrace
  This Infant to herself; and I, next day,
  Endeavoured in my native tongue to trace
  Such things as she unto the Child might say:       1820.

  Once, having seen her take with fond embrace
  This Infant to herself, I framed a lay,
  Endeavouring, in my native tongue, to trace        1827.]


[Variant 5:

1845.

  And thus, from what I knew, had heard, and guess'd,     1807.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

  'Tis gone--forgotten--let me do
  My best--there was a smile or two,     1807.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

  ... sweet ...      1807.]


[Variant 8:

1836.

  For they confound me: as it is,
  I have forgot those smiles of his.          1807.

  For they bewilder me--even now
  _His_ smiles are lost,--I know not how!     1820.

  By those bewildering glances crost
  In which the light of his is lost. [a]      1827.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

  From France across the Ocean came;     1807.]


[Variant 10:

1845.

  My Darling, she is not to me
  What thou art! though I love her well:     1807.

  But to my heart she cannot be              1836.]


[Variant 11:

1807.

  And I grow happy while I speak,
  Kiss, kiss me, Baby, thou art good.     MS.]


[Variant 12:

1820.

  ... that quiet face,      1807.]


[Variant 13:

1807.

  A Joy, a Comforter thou art;
  Sunshine and pleasure to my heart;
  And love and hope and mother's glee,      MS.]


[Variant 14:

1807.

  My yearnings are allayed by thee,
  My heaviness is turned to glee.      MS.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: In a letter to Barron Field (24th Oct. 1828),
Wordsworth says that his substitution of the text of 1827 for that of
1807, was due to the objections of Coleridge.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE CUCKOO


Composed 1802.--Published 1807


[Composed in the Orchard at Town-end, 1804.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  O blithe New-comer! I have heard,
  I hear thee and rejoice.
  O Cuckoo! shall I call thee Bird,
  Or but a wandering Voice? [A]

  While I am lying on the grass                            5
  Thy twofold shout I hear,
  From hill to hill it seems to pass,
  At once far off, and near. [1]

  Though babbling only to the Vale,
  Of sunshine and of flowers,                             10
  Thou bringest unto me a tale [2]
  Of visionary hours.

  Thrice welcome, darling of the Spring!
  Even yet thou art to me
  No bird, but an invisible thing, [3]                    15
  A voice, a mystery;

  The same whom in my school-boy days
  I listened to; that Cry
  Which made me look a thousand ways
  In bush, and tree, and sky.                             20

  To seek thee did I often rove
  Through woods and on the green;
  And thou wert still a hope, a love;
  Still longed for, never seen.

  And I can listen to thee yet;                           25
  Can lie upon the plain
  And listen, till I do beget
  That golden time again.

  O blessed Bird! the earth we pace
  Again appears to be                                     30
  An unsubstantial, faery place;
  That is fit home for Thee!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  While I am lying on the grass,
  I hear thy restless shout:
  From hill to hill it seems to pass,
  About, and all about!            1807.

  Thy loud note smites my ear!--
  From hill to hill it seems to pass,
  At once far off and near!        1815.

  Thy loud note smites my ear!
  It seems to fill the whole air's space,
  At once far off and near!        1820.

  Thy twofold shout I hear,
  That seems to fill the whole air's space,
  As loud far off as near. [a]     1827.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  To me, no Babbler with a tale
  Of sunshine and of flowers,
  Thou tellest, Cuckoo! in the vale      1807.

  I hear thee babbling to the Vale
  Of sunshine and of flowers;
  And unto me thou bring'st a tale       1815.

  But unto me ....                       1820.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  No Bird; but an invisible Thing,      1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A:

  "_Vox et praterea nihil_. See Lipsius 'of the Nightingale.'"

Barron Field.--Ed.


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: Barron Field remonstrated with Wordsworth about this
reading, and he agreed to restore that of 1820; saying, at the same
time, that he had "made the change to record a fact observed by
himself."--Ed.]


In the chronological lists of his poems, published in 1815 and 1820,
Wordsworth left a blank opposite this one, in the column containing the
year of composition. From 1836 to 1849, the date assigned by him was
1804. But in Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal the following occurs under
date Tuesday, 22nd March 1802:

  "A mild morning. William worked at the Cuckoo poem.... At the closing
  in of day, went to sit in the orchard. William came to me, and walked
  backwards and forwards. W. repeated the poem to me. I left him there;
  and in 20 minutes he came in, rather tired with attempting to write."

  "Friday (March 25).--A beautiful morning. William worked at 'The
  Cuckoo'."

It is therefore evident that it belongs to the year 1802; although it
may have been altered and readjusted in 1804. The connection of the
seventh stanza of this poem with the first of that which follows it, "My
heart leaps up," etc., and of both with the 'Ode, Intimations of
Immortality' (vol. viii.), is obvious.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"MY HEART LEAPS UP WHEN I BEHOLD"


Composed March 26, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood." In 1807 it was
No. 4 of the series called "Moods of my own Mind."--Ed.




  My heart leaps up when I behold
    A rainbow in the sky:
  So was it when my life began;
  So is it now I am a man;
  So be it when I shall grow old,                        5
    Or let me die!
  The Child is father of the Man; [A]
  And I could wish my days to be
  Bound each to each by natural piety.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Milton's phrase in 'Paradise Regained' (book iv. l.
220):

      'The childhood shews the man,
  As morning shews the day.'

Dryden's 'All for Love', act IV. scene I:

  'Men are but children of a larger growth.'

And Pope's 'Essay on Man', Ep. iv. l. 175:

  'The boy and man an individual makes.'

Also Chatterton's 'Fragment' (Aldine edition, vol. 1. p. 132):

  'Nature in the infant marked the man.'

Ed.]



  "March 26, 1802.--While I was getting into bed he" (W.) "wrote 'The
  Rainbow.'"

  "May 14th.--... William very nervous. After he was in bed, haunted
  with altering 'The Rainbow.'"

(Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal.) This poem was known familiarly
in the household as "The Rainbow," although not printed under that
title. The text was never changed.

In 'The Friend', vol. i. p. 58 (ed. 1818), Coleridge writes:

  "Men laugh at the falsehoods imposed on them during their childhood,
  because they are not good and wise enough to contemplate the past in
  the present, and so to produce that continuity in their
  self-consciousness, which Nature has made the law of their animal
  life. Men are ungrateful to others, only when they have ceased to look
  back on their former selves with joy and tenderness. They exist in
  fragments."

He then quotes the above poem, and adds:

  "I am informed that these lines have been cited as a specimen of
  despicable puerility. So much the worse for the citer; not willingly
  in _his_ presence would I behold the sun setting behind our
  mountains.... But let the dead bury their dead! The poet sang for the
  living.... I was always pleased with the motto placed under the figure
  of the rosemary in old herbals:

    'Sus, apage! Haud tibi spiro.'"

Compare the passage in 'The Excursion' (book ix. l. 36) beginning:

  '... Ah! why in age
  Do we revert so fondly, etc.'

also that in 'The Prelude' (book v. l. 507) beginning:

  'Our childhood sits.'





       *       *       *       *       *





WRITTEN IN MARCH, WHILE RESTING ON THE BRIDGE AT THE FOOT OF BROTHERS
WATER


Composed April 16, 1802.--Published 1807


[Extempore. This little poem was a favourite with Joanna Baillie.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  The Cock is crowing,
    The stream is flowing,
    The small birds twitter,
    The lake doth glitter,
  The green field sleeps in the sun;                       5
    The oldest and youngest
    Are at work with the strongest;
    The cattle are grazing,
    Their heads never raising;
  There are forty feeding like one!                       10

    Like an army defeated
    The snow hath retreated,
    And now doth fare ill
    On the top of the bare hill;
  The Ploughboy is whooping--anon--anon: [A]              15
    There's joy in the mountains;
    There's life in the fountains;
    Small clouds are sailing,
    Blue sky prevailing;
  The rain is over and gone!                              20


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This line was an afterthought.--Ed.]


The text of this poem was never altered. It was not "written in March"
(as the title states), but on the 16th of April (Good Friday) 1802. The
bridge referred to crosses Goldrill Beck, a little below Hartsop in
Patterdale. The following, from Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal, records
the walk from Ullswater, over Kirkstone Pass, to Ambleside:

  "Friday, 16th April (Good Friday).--... When we came to the foot of
  Brothers Water, I left William sitting on the bridge, and went along
  the path on the right side of the lake through the wood. I was
  delighted with what I saw: the water under the boughs of the bare old
  trees, the simplicity of the mountains, and the exquisite beauty of
  the path. There was one grey cottage. I repeated 'The Glowworm' as I
  walked along. I hung over the gate, and thought I could have stayed
  for ever. When I returned, I found William writing a poem descriptive
  of the sights and sounds we saw and heard. There was the gentle
  flowing of the stream, the glittering lively lake, green fields,
  without a living creature to be seen on them; behind us, a flat
  pasture with forty-two cattle feeding; to our left, the road leading
  to the hamlet. No smoke there, the sun shone on the bare roofs. The
  people were at work, ploughing, harrowing, and sowing; lasses working;
  a dog barking now and then; cocks crowing, birds twittering; the snow
  in patches at the top of the highest hills; yellow palms, purple and
  green twigs on the birches, ashes with their glittering stems quite
  bare. The hawthorn a bright green, with black stems under the oak. The
  moss of the oaks glossy.... As we went up the vale of Brothers Water,
  more and more cattle feeding, a hundred of them. William finished his
  poem before we got to the foot of Kirkstone. There were hundreds of
  cattle in the vale.... The walk up Kirkstone was very interesting. The
  becks among the rocks were all alive. William shewed me the little
  mossy streamlet which he had before loved, when he saw its bright
  green track in the snow. The view above Ambleside very beautiful.
  There we sate, and looked down on the green vale. We watched the crows
  at a little distance from us become white as silver, as they flew in
  the sunshine; and, when they went still farther, they looked like
  shapes of water passing over the green fields."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE REDBREAST CHASING THE BUTTERFLY [A]


Composed April 18, 1802.--Published 1807


[Observed, as described, in the then beautiful orchard, Town-end,
Grasmere.--I.F.]

Included among the "Poems of the Fancy."

In some editions this poem is assigned to the year 1806; but, in Dorothy
Wordsworth's Journal the following occurs, under date "Sunday, 18th"
(April 1802):

  "A mild grey morning with rising vapours. We sate in the orchard.
  William wrote the poem on the Robin and the Butterfly.... W. met me at
  Rydal with the conclusion of the poem to the Robin. I read it to him
  in bed. We left out some lines."

Ed.




  Art thou the bird whom Man loves best,
  The pious bird [B] with the scarlet breast,
    Our little English Robin;
  The bird that comes about our doors
  When Autumn-winds are sobbing?                            5
  Art thou the Peter of Norway Boors?
    Their Thomas in Finland,
    And Russia far inland?
  The bird, that [1] by some name or other
  All men who know thee call their brother,                10
  The darling of children and men?
  Could Father Adam [C] open his eyes
  And see this sight beneath the skies,
  He'd wish to close them again.
--If the Butterfly knew but his friend,                  15
  Hither his flight he would bend;
  And find his way to me,
  Under the branches of the tree:
  In and out, he darts about;
  Can this be the bird, to man so good,                    20
  That, after their bewildering, [2]
  Covered [3] with leaves the little children,
    So painfully in the wood?

  What ailed thee, Robin, that thou could'st pursue
    A beautiful creature,                                  25
  That is gentle by nature?
  Beneath the summer sky
  From flower to flower let him fly;
  'Tis all that he wishes to do.
  The cheerer Thou of our in-door sadness,                 30
  He is the friend of our summer gladness:
  What hinders, then, that ye should be
  Playmates in the sunny weather,
  And fly about in the air together!
  His beautiful wings in crimson are drest,                35
  A crimson as bright as thine own: [4]
  Would'st thou be [5] happy in thy nest,
  O pious Bird! whom man loves best,
  Love him, or leave him alone!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1849.

  ... whom ...       1807.

  ... who ...        1827.]



[Variant 2:

1815.

  In and out, he darts about;
  His little heart is throbbing:
  Can this be the Bird, to man so good,
    Our consecrated Robin!
  That, after ...      1807.

  ... Robin! Robin!
  His little heart is throbbing;
  Can this ...         MS.]


[Variant 3:

1832.

  Did cover ...      1807.]


[Variant 4:

1815.

  ... Like thine own breast
  His beautiful wings in crimson are drest,
  As if he were bone of thy bone.         MS.

  Like the hues of thy breast
  His beautiful wings in crimson are drest,
  A brother he seems of thine own:        1807.

  ... in the air together!
  His beautiful bosom is drest,
  In crimson as bright as thine own:      1832.

The edition of 1836 resumes the text of 1815.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

  If thou would'st be ...      1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The title, in the editions 1807 to 1820, was 'The Redbreast
and the Butterfly'. In the editions 1827 to 1843 it was 'The Redbreast
and Butterfly'. The final title was given in 1845.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Cowley:

  'And Robin Redbreasts whom men praise,
  For pious birds.'

Ed.]


[Footnote C: See 'Paradise Lost', book XI., where Adam points out to Eve
the ominous sign of the Eagle chasing "two Birds of gayest plume," and
the gentle Hart and Hind pursued by their enemy.--W. W. 1815.

The passage in book XI. of 'Paradise Lost' includes lines 185-90.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TO A BUTTERFLY (#2)


Composed April 20, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written at the same time and place. The Orchard, Grasmere Town-end,
1801.--I.F.]

Included among the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  I've watch'd you now a full [1] half-hour,
  Self-poised upon that yellow flower;
  And, little Butterfly! indeed
  I know not if you sleep or feed.
  How motionless!--not frozen seas                          5
  More motionless! and then
  What joy awaits you, when the breeze
  Hath found you out among the trees,
  And calls you forth again!

  This plot of orchard-ground is ours;                     10
  My trees they are, my Sister's flowers;
  Here rest your wings when they are weary;
  Here lodge as in a sanctuary! [2]
  Come often to us, fear no wrong;
  Sit near us on the bough!                                15
  We'll talk of sunshine and of song,
  And summer days, when we were young;
  Sweet childish days, that were as long
  As twenty days are now.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  ... short ...       1836.

The text of 1845 reverts to the reading of 1807.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

  Stop here whenever you are weary,
  And rest as in a sanctuary!       1807.

  And feed ...                      MS.]



Wordsworth's date, as given to Miss Fenwick, is incorrect. In her
Journal, April 20, 1802, Dorothy Wordsworth writes:

  "William wrote a conclusion to the poem of 'The Butterfly', 'I've
  watch'd you now a full half-hour.'"

This, and the structure of the two poems, makes it probable that the
latter was originally meant to be a sort of conclusion to the former (p.
283); but they were always printed as separate poems.

Many of the "flowers" in the orchard at Dove Cottage were planted by
Dorothy Wordsworth, and some of the "trees" by William. The "summer
days" of childhood are referred to in the previous poem, 'To a
Butterfly', written on the 14th of March 1802.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





FORESIGHT


Composed April 28, 1802.--Published 1807


[Also composed in the Orchard, Town-end, Grasmere.--I.F.]

Included among the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.




  That is work of waste and ruin--[1]
  Do as Charles and I are doing!
  Strawberry-blossoms, one and all,
  We must spare them--here are many:
  Look at it--the flower is small,                          5
  Small and low, though fair as any:
  Do not touch it! summers two
  I am older, Anne, than you.
  Pull the primrose, sister Anne!
  Pull as many as you can.                                 10
  --Here are daisies, take your fill;
  Pansies, and the cuckoo-flower:
  Of the lofty daffodil
  Make your bed, or [2] make your bower;
  Fill your lap, and fill your bosom;                      15
  Only spare the strawberry-blossom!

  Primroses, the Spring may love them--
  Summer knows but little of them:
  Violets, a barren kind,
  Withered on the ground must lie;                         20
  Daisies leave no fruit behind
  When the pretty flowerets die;
  Pluck them, and another year
  As many will be blowing here. [3]

  God has given a kindlier power [4]                       25
  To the favoured strawberry-flower.
  Hither soon as spring is fled
  You and Charles and I will walk; [5]
  Lurking berries, ripe and red,
  Then will hang on every stalk,                           30
  Each within its leafy bower;
  And for that promise spare the flower!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  That is work which I am rueing--1807.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  ... and ...      1807.]


[Variant 3:

1815.

  Violets, do what they will,
  Wither'd on the ground must lie;
  Daisies will be daisies still;
  Daisies they must live and die:
  Fill your lap, and fill your bosom,
  Only spare the Strawberry-blossom!      1807.]


[Variant 4: This last stanza was added in the edition of 1815.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

  When the months of spring are fled
  Hither let us bend our walk;      1815.]


The full title of this poem, in the editions of 1807 to 1832, was
'Foresight, or the Charge of a Child to his younger Companion', but it
was originally known in the household as "Children gathering Flowers."
The shortened title was adopted in 1836. The following is from Dorothy
Wordsworth's Journal:

  "Wednesday, 28th April (1802).--Copied the 'Prioress's Tale'. William
  was in the orchard. I went to him; he worked away at his poem, though
  he was ill, and tired. I happened to say that when I was a child I
  would not have pulled a strawberry blossom; I left him, and wrote out
  the 'Manciple's Tale'. At dinner time he came in with the poem of
  'Children gathering Flowers,' but it was not quite finished, and it
  kept him long from his dinner. It is now done. He is working at 'The
  Tinker.'"

At an earlier date in the same year,--Jan. 31st, 1802,--the following
occurs:

  "I found a strawberry blossom in a rock. The little slender flower had
  more courage than the green leaves, for _they_ were but half expanded
  and half grown, but the blossom was spread full out. I uprooted it
  rashly, and I felt as if I had been committing an outrage; so I
  planted it again. It will have but a stormy life of it, but let it
  live if it can."

With this poem compare a parallel passage in Marvel's 'The Picture of T.
C. in a Prospect of Flowers':

  'But oh, young beauty of the woods,
  Whom nature courts with fruits and flowers,
  Gather the flowers, but spare the buds;
  Lest Flora, angry at thy crime
  To kill her infants in their prime,
  Should quickly make the example yours;
  And, ere we see,
  Nip in the blossom all our hopes in thee.'

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE SMALL CELANDINE [A]


Composed April 30, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. It is remarkable that this flower,
coming out so early in the spring as it does, and so bright and
beautiful, and in such profusion, should not have been noticed earlier
in English verse. What adds much to the interest that attends it is its
habit of shutting itself up and opening out according to the degree of
light and temperature of the air.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Fancy." In the original MS. this poem is called
'To the lesser Celandine', but in the proof "small" was substituted for
"lesser."

In Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal the following occurs, under date April
30, 1802:

  "We came into the orchard directly after breakfast, and sat there. The
  lake was calm, the sky cloudy. William began to write the poem of 'The
  Celandine'.... I walked backwards and forwards with William. He
  repeated his poem to me, then he got to work again, and would not give
  over."

Ed.




  Pansies, lilies, kingcups, daisies,
  Let them live upon their praises;
  Long as there's a sun that sets,
  Primroses will have their glory;
  Long as there are violets,                            5
  They will have a place in story:
  There's a flower that shall be mine,
  'Tis the little Celandine.

  Eyes of some men travel far
  For the finding of a star;                           10
  Up and down the heavens they go,
  Men that keep a mighty rout!
  I'm as great as they, I trow,
  Since the day I found thee out,
  Little Flower!--I'll make a stir,                    15
  Like a sage [1] astronomer.

  Modest, yet withal an Elf
  Bold, and lavish of thyself;
  Since we needs must first have met
  I have seen thee, high and low,                      20
  Thirty years or more, and yet
  'Twas a face I did not know;
  Thou hast now, go where I may,
  Fifty greetings in a day.

  Ere a leaf is on a bush,                             25
  In the time before the thrush
  Has a thought about her [2] nest,
  Thou wilt come with half a call,
  Spreading out thy glossy breast
  Like a careless Prodigal;                            30
  Telling tales about the sun,
  When we've little warmth, or none.

  Poets, vain men in their mood!
  Travel with the multitude:
  Never heed them; I aver                              35
  That they all are wanton wooers;
  But the thrifty cottager,
  Who stirs little out of doors,
  Joys to spy thee near her home;
  Spring is coming, Thou art come!                     40

  [B]

  Comfort have thou of thy merit,
  Kindly, unassuming Spirit!
  Careless of thy neighbourhood,
  Thou dost show thy pleasant face
  On the moor, and in the wood,                        45
  In the lane;--there's not a place,
  Howsoever mean it be,
  But 'tis good enough for thee.

  Ill befal the yellow flowers,
  Children of the flaring hours!                       50
  Buttercups, that will be seen,
  Whether we will see or no;
  Others, too, of lofty mien;
  They have done as worldlings do,
  Taken praise that should be thine,                   55
  Little, humble Celandine!

  Prophet of delight and mirth,
  Ill-requited [3] upon earth;
  Herald of a mighty band,
  Of a joyous train ensuing,                           60
  Serving at my heart's command,
  Tasks that are no tasks renewing, [4]
  I will sing, as doth behove,
  Hymns in praise of what I love!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... great ...     1807.]


[Variant 2:

1832.

  ... it's ...     1807.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  Scorn'd and slighted ...       1807.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  Singing at my heart's command,
  In the lanes my thoughts pursuing,      1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Common Pilewort.--W. W. 1807.]


[Footnote B: The following stanza was inserted in the editions of
1836-1843:

  'Drawn by what peculiar spell,
  By what charm for sight or smell,
  Do those winged dim-eyed creatures,
  Labourers sent from waxen cells,
  Settle on thy brilliant features,
  In neglect of buds and bells
  Opening daily at thy side,
  By the season multiplied?'

In 1845 it was transferred to the following poem, where it will be
found, with a change of text.--Ed.]





         *       *       *       *       *





TO THE SAME FLOWER


Composed May 1, 1802.--Published 1807


One of the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  Pleasures newly found are sweet
  When they lie about our feet:
  February last, my heart
  First at sight of thee was glad;
  All unheard of as thou art,                              5
  Thou must needs, I think, have had,
  Celandine! and long ago,
  Praise of which I nothing know.

  I have not a doubt but he,
  Whosoe'er the man might be,                             10
  Who the first with pointed rays
  (Workman worthy to be sainted)
  Set the sign-board in a blaze,
  When the rising [1] sun he painted,
  Took the fancy from a glance                            15
  At thy glittering countenance.

  Soon as gentle breezes bring
  News of winter's vanishing,
  And the children build their bowers,
  Sticking 'kerchief-plots of mould                       20
  All about with full-blown flowers,
  Thick as sheep in shepherd's fold!
  With the proudest thou art there,
  Mantling in the tiny square.

  Often have I sighed to measure                          25
  By myself a lonely pleasure,
  Sighed to think, I read a book
  Only read, perhaps, by me;
  Yet I long could overlook
  Thy bright coronet and Thee,                            30
  And thy arch and wily ways,
  And thy store of other praise.

  Blithe of heart, from week to week
  Thou dost play at hide-and-seek;
  While the patient primrose sits                         35
  Like a beggar in the cold,
  Thou, a flower of wiser wits,
  Slip'st into thy sheltering [2] hold;
  Liveliest of the vernal train [3]
  When ye all are out again.                              40

  Drawn by what peculiar spell,
  By what charm of sight or smell,
  Does the dim-eyed curious Bee,
  Labouring for her waxen cells,
  Fondly settle upon Thee                                 45
  Prized above all buds and bells
  Opening daily at thy side,
  By the season multiplied? [4]

  Thou art not beyond the moon,
  But a thing "beneath our shoon:" [A]                    50
  Let the bold Discoverer thrid
  In his bark the polar sea;
  Rear who will a pyramid; [5]
  Praise it is enough for me,
  If there be but three or four                           55
  Who will love my little Flower.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... risen ...       1807.]


[Variant 2:

1832.

  ... shelter'd ...      1807.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  Bright as any of the train      1807.]


[Variant 4: This stanza was added in 1845. (See note [Footnote B, To the
Small Celandine], p. 302.)]


[Variant 5:

1845.

  Let, as old Magellen did,
  Others roam about the sea;
  Build who will a pyramid; [a]      1807.

  Let, with bold advent'rous skill,
  Others thrid the polar sea;
  Rear a pyramid who will;          1820.

  Let the bold Adventurer thrid
  In his bark the polar sea;
  Rear who will a pyramid;          1827.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This may be an imperfect reminiscence of 'Comus', ll.
634-5.--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: Barron Field asked Wordsworth to restore these lines of
1807, and Wordsworth promised to do so, but never did it.--Ed.]


The following is an extract from Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal.
Saturday, May 1.

  "A heavenly morning. We went into the garden, and sowed the scarlet
  beans about the house. It was a clear sky. I sowed the flowers,
  William helped me. We then went and sat in the orchard till dinner
  time. It was very hot. William wrote 'The Celandine' (second part). We
  planned a shed, for the sun was too much for us."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





STANZAS WRITTEN IN MY POCKET COPY OF THOMSON'S "CASTLE OF INDOLENCE"


Begun 9th May, finished 11th May, 1802.--Published 1815


[Composed in the orchard, Town-end, Grasmere, Coleridge living with us
much at this time: his son Hartley has said, that his father's character
and habits are here preserved in a livelier way than in anything that
has been written about him. I.F.]

One of the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  Within our happy Castle there dwelt One
  Whom without blame I may not overlook;
  For never sun on living creature shone
  Who more devout enjoyment with us took:
  Here on his hours he hung as on a book,                           5
  On his own time here would he float away,
  As doth a fly upon a summer brook;
  But go to-morrow, or belike to-day,
  Seek for him,--he is fled; and whither none can say.

  Thus often would he leave our peaceful home,                     10
  And find elsewhere his business or delight;
  Out of our Valley's limits did he roam:
  Full many a time, upon a stormy night, [A]
  His voice came to us from the neighbouring height:
  Oft could [1] we see him driving full in view                    15
  At midday when the sun was shining bright;
  What ill was on him, what he had to do,
  A mighty wonder bred among our quiet crew.

  Ah! piteous sight it was to see this Man
  When he came back to us, a withered flower,--20
  Or like a sinful creature, pale and wan.
  Down would he sit; and without strength or power
  Look at the common grass from hour to hour:
  And oftentimes, how long I fear to say,
  Where apple-trees in blossom made a bower,                       25
  Retired in that sunshiny shade he lay; [B]
  And, like a naked Indian, slept himself away.

  Great wonder to our gentle tribe it was
  Whenever from our Valley he withdrew;
  For happier soul no living creature has                          30
  Than he had, being here the long day through.
  Some thought he was a lover, and did woo:
  Some thought far worse of him, and judged him wrong;
  But verse was what he had been wedded to;
  And his own mind did like a tempest strong                       35
  Come to him thus, and drove the weary Wight along.[C]

  With him there often walked in friendly guise,
  Or lay upon the moss by brook or tree,
  A noticeable Man with large grey eyes,
  And a pale face that seemed undoubtedly                          40
  As if a blooming face it ought to be;
  Heavy his low-hung lip did oft appear,
  Deprest by weight of musing Phantasy;
  Profound his forehead was, though not severe;
  Yet some did think that he had little business here:             45

  Sweet heaven forefend! his was a lawful right;
  Noisy he was, and gamesome as a boy;
  His limbs would toss about him with delight
  Like branches when strong winds the trees annoy.
  Nor lacked his calmer hours device or toy                        50
  To banish listlessness and irksome care;
  He would have taught you how you might employ
  Yourself; and many did to him repair,--
  And certes not in vain; he had inventions rare.

  Expedients, too, of simplest sort he tried:                      55
  Long blades of grass, plucked round him as he lay,
  Made, to his ear attentively applied,
  A pipe on which the wind would deftly play;
  Glasses he had, that little things display,
  The beetle panoplied in gems and gold, [2]                       60
  A mailed angel on a battle-day;
  The mysteries that cups of flowers enfold, [3]
  And all the gorgeous sights which fairies do behold.

  He would entice that other Man to hear
  His music, and to view his imagery:                              65
  And, sooth, these two were each to the other dear:
  No livelier love in such a place could be: [4]
  There did they dwell-from earthly labour free,
  As happy spirits as were ever seen;
  If but a bird, to keep them company,                             70
  Or butterfly sate down, they were, I ween,
  As pleased as if the same had been a Maiden-queen.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... did ...      1815.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  The beetle with his radiance manifold,    1815.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  And cups of flowers, and herbage green and gold;    1815.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  And, sooth, these two did love each other dear,
  As far as love in such a place could be;    1815.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare

  'And oft he traced the uplands to survey,
  When o'er the sky advanced the kindling dawn,
  The crimson cloud.'

Beattie's 'Minstrel', book I, st. 20.

  'And oft the craggy cliff he loved to climb
  When all in mist the world below was lost.'

Book I. st. 21.

  'And of each gentle, and each dreadful scene
  In darkness, and in storm, he found delight.'

Book I. st. 22. Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare the stanza in 'A Poet's Epitaph' (p. 77), beginning

  'He is retired as noontide dew.'

Ed.]


[Footnote C: Many years ago Canon Ainger pointed out to me a parallel
between Beattie's description of 'The Minstrel' and Wordsworth's account
of himself in this poem. It is somewhat curious that Dorothy Wordsworth,
writing to Miss Pollard from Forncett in 1793, quotes the line from 'The
Minstrel', book I. stanza 22,

  "In truth he was a strange and wayward wight,"

and adds

  "That verse of Beattie's 'Minstrel' always reminds me of him, and
  indeed the whole character of Edwin resembles much what William was
  when I first knew him after leaving Halifax."

Mr. T. Hutchinson called the attention of Professor Dowden to the same
resemblance between the two pictures. With lines 35, 36, compare in
Shelley's 'Adonais', stanza xxxi.:

  'And his own thoughts, along that rugged way,
  Pursued, like raging hounds, their father and their prey.'

Ed.]


There can now be no doubt that, in the first four of these 'Stanzas',
Wordsworth refers to himself; and that, in the last four, he refers to
Coleridge. For a time it was uncertain whether in the earlier stanzas he
had Coleridge, or himself, in view; and whether, in the later ones, some
one else was, or was not, described. De Quincey, quoting (as he often
did) in random fashion, mixes up extracts from each set of the stanzas,
and applies them both to Coleridge; and Dorothy Wordsworth, in her
Journal, gives apparent (though only apparent) sanction to a reverse
order of allusion, by writing of "the stanzas about C. and himself" (her
brother). The following are her references to the poem in that Journal:

  "9th May (1802).-After tea he (W.) wrote two stanzas in the manner of
  Thomson's 'Castle of Indolence', and was tired out.

  "10th May.--William still at work, though it is past ten o'clock ...
  William did not sleep till three o'clock."

  "11th May.--William finished the stanzas about C. and himself. He did
  not go out to-day. ... He completely finished his poem. He went to bed
  at twelve o'clock."

From these extracts two things are evident,

  (1) who the persons are described in the stanzas, and

  (2) the immense labour bestowed upon the poem.

In the 'Memoirs of Wordsworth', by the late Bishop of Lincoln, there is
a passage (vol. ii. chap. li. p. 309) amongst the "Personal
Reminiscences, 1836," in which the Hon. Mr. Justice Coleridge virtually
decides the question of the identity of the two persons referred to, in
his record of a conversation with the poet. It is as follows:

  "October 10th.--I have passed a great many hours to-day with
  Wordsworth in his home. I stumbled on him with proof sheets before
  him. He read me nearly all the sweet stanzas written in his copy of
  the 'Castle of Indolence', describing himself and my uncle; and he and
  Mrs. W. both assured me the description of the latter at that time was
  perfectly accurate; and he was almost as a great boy in feelings, and
  had all the tricks and fancies there described. Mrs. W. seemed to look
  back on him, and those times, with the fondest affection."

I think "the neighbouring height" referred to is the height of White
Moss Common, behind the Fir-Grove, where Wordsworth was often heard
murmuring out his verses," booing" as the country folks said: and the

    'driving full in view
  At midday when the sun was shining bright,'

aptly describes his habits as recorded in his sister's Journal, and
elsewhere. The "withered flower," the "creature pale and wan," are
significant of those terrible reactions of spirit, which followed his
joyous hours of insight and inspiration. Stanzas IV. to VII. of
'Resolution and Independence' (p. 314), in which Wordsworth undoubtedly
described himself, may be compared with stanza III. of this poem. The
lines

  'Down would he sit; and without strength or power
  Look at the common grass from hour to hour,'

are aptly illustrated by such passages in his sister's Journal, as the
following, of 29th April 1802:

  "We went to John's Grove, sate a while at first; afterwards William
  lay, and I lay in the trench, under the fence--he with his eyes
  closed, and listening to the waterfalls and the birds. There was no
  one waterfall above another--it was a kind of water in the air--the
  voice of the air. We were unseen by one another."

Again, April 23rd,

  "Coleridge and I pushed on before. We left William sitting on the
  stones, feasting with silence."

And this recalls the first verse of 'Expostulation and Reply', written
at Alfoxden in 1798;

  'Why, William, on that old grey stone,
  Thus for the length of half a day,
  Why, William, sit you thus alone,
  And dream your time away?'

The retreat where "apple-trees in blossom made a bower," and where he so
often "slept himself away," was evidently the same as that described in
the poem 'The Green Linnet':

  'Beneath these fruit-tree boughs that shed
  Their snow white blossoms on my head.'

On the other hand, the "low-hung lip" and "profound" forehead of the
other, the "noticeable Man with large grey eyes," mark him out as S. T.
C.; "the rapt One, of the god-like forehead," described in the
'Extempore Effusion upon the Death of James Hogg'. The description
"Noisy he was, and gamesome as a boy," is verified by what the poet and
his wife said to Mr. Justice Coleridge in 1836. In addition, Mr.
Hutchinson of Kimbolton tells me he "often heard his father say that
Coleridge was uproarious in his mirth."

Matthew Arnold wrote me an interesting letter some years ago about these
stanzas, from which I make the following extract:

  "When one looks uneasily at a poem it is easy to fidget oneself
  further, and neither the Wordsworth nor the Coleridge of our common
  notions seem to be exactly hit off in the 'Stanzas'; still, I believe
  that the first described is Wordsworth and that the second described
  is Coleridge. I have myself heard Wordsworth speak of his prolonged
  exhausting wanderings among the hills. Then Miss Fenwick's notes show
  that Coleridge is certainly one of the two personages of the poem, and
  there are points in the description of the second man which suit him
  very well. The 'profound forehead' is a touch akin to the 'god-like
  forehead' in the mention of Coleridge in a later poem.

  "I have a sort of recollection of having heard something about the
  'inventions rare,' and Coleridge is certain to have dabbled, at one
  time or other, in natural philosophy."

In 1796 Coleridge wrote to his friend Cottle from Nether Stowey:

  " ... I should not think of devoting less than 20 years to an Epic
  Poem: ten to collect materials and warm my mind with universal
  science. I would be a tolerable Mathematician, I would thoroughly know
  Mechanics, Hydrostatics, Optics, and Astronomy, Botany, Metallurgy,
  Fossilism, Chemistry, Geology, Anatomy, Medicine--then the 'mind of
  man'--then the 'minds of men'--in all Travels, Voyages, and Histories.
  So I would spend ten years--the next five to the composition of the
  poem--and the last five to the correction of it. So would I write,
  haply not unhearing of the divine and rightly whispering Voice," etc.

Mr. T. Hutchinson (Dublin) writes in 'The Athenaeum', Dec. 15, 1894:

  "I take it for granted these lines were written, not only on the
  fly-leaf of Wordsworth's copy of the 'Castle of Indolence', but also
  by way of Supplement to that poem; i. e. as an 'addendum' to the
  descriptive list of the denizens of the Castle given in stanzas
  LVII-LXIX of Canto I.; that, in short, they are meant to be read as
  though they were an after-thought of James Thomson's. Their author,
  therefore, has rightly imparted to them the curiously blended flavour
  of 'romantic melancholy and slippered mirth,' of dreamlike vagueness
  and smiling hyperbole, which forms the distinctive mark of Thomson's
  poem; and thus the Poet and the Philosopher-Friend of Wordsworth's
  stanzas, like Thomson's companion sketches of the splenetic Solitary,
  the 'bard more fat than bard beseems,' and the 'little, round, fat,
  oily Man of God,' are neither more nor less than gentle caricatures."

It has been suggested by Coleridge's grandson that Wordsworth was
describing S. T. C. in all the stanzas of this poem; that he drew two
separate pictures of him; in the first four stanzas a realistic
"character portrait," and in the last four a "companion picture,
figuring the outward semblance of Coleridge, but embodying
characteristics drawn from a third person"; so that we have a "fancy
sketch" mixed up with a real one. I cannot agree with this.  The
evidence against it is

  (1) Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal;
  (2) the poet's and his wife's remarks to Mr. Justice Coleridge;
  (3) the fact that Wordsworth was not in the habit of "passing from
  realism into artistic composition," except where he distinctly
  indicated it, as in the case of the Hawkshead Schoolmaster, in the
  "Matthew" poems.  Such composite or conglomerate work was quite
  foreign to Wordsworth's genius.

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





RESOLUTION AND INDEPENDENCE


Begun May 3, finished July 4, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. This old man I met a few hundred yards
from my cottage; and the account of him is taken from his own mouth. I
was in the state of feeling described in the beginning of the poem,
while crossing over Barton Fell from Mr. Clarkson's, at the foot of
Ullswater, towards Askham. The image of the hare I then observed on the
ridge of the Fell.--I.F.]

This poem was known in the Wordsworth household as "The Leech-Gatherer,"
although it never received that name in print. An entry in Dorothy
Wordsworth's Journal of Friday, 3rd October 1800, may preface what she
wrote in 1802 about the composition of the poem.

  "When William and I returned from accompanying Jones, we met an old
  man almost double. He had on a coat thrown over his shoulders above
  his waistcoat and coat. Under this he carried a bundle, and had an
  apron on, and a night-cap. His face was interesting. He had dark eyes,
  and a long nose. John, who afterwards met him at Wytheburn, took him
  for a Jew. He was of Scotch parents, but had been born in the army. He
  had had a wife, 'and a good woman, and it pleased God to bless him
  with ten children.' All these were dead but one, of whom he had not
  heard for many years, a sailor. His trade was to gather leeches; but
  now leeches were scarce, and he had not strength for it. He lived by
  begging, and was making his way to Carlisle where he would buy a few
  books to sell. He said leeches were very scarce, partly owing to this
  dry season; but many years they had been scarce. He supposed it was
  owing to their being much sought after; that they did not breed fast;
  and were of slow growth. Leeches were formerly 2s. 6d. the 100; now
  they were 30s. He had been hurt in driving a cart, his leg broken, his
  body driven over, his skull fractured. He felt no pain till he
  recovered from his first insensibility. It was late in the evening,
  when the light was just going away."

It is most likely that this walk of William and Dorothy Wordsworth
"accompanying Jones," was on the day of Jones's departure from Dove
Cottage, viz. 26th September.

The Journal continues:

  "Tuesday, 4th May, 1802.--Though William went to bed nervous and jaded
  in the extreme, he rose refreshed. I wrote out 'The Leech-Gatherer'
  for him, which he had begun the night before, and of which he wrote
  several stanzas in bed this morning...."

  (They started to walk up the Raise to Wytheburn.)

  "It was very hot; we rested several times by the way, read, and
  repeated 'The Leech-Gatherer.'"

  "Friday, 7th May.--William had slept uncommonly well, so, feeling
  himself strong, he fell to work at 'The Leech-Gatherer'; he wrote hard
  at it till dinner time, then he gave over, tired to death--he had
  finished the poem."

  "Sunday morning, 9th May.--William worked at 'The Leech-Gatherer'
  almost incessantly from morning till tea-time. I copied 'The
  Leech-Gatherer' and other poems for Coleridge. I was oppressed and
  sick at heart, for he wearied himself to death."

  "Sunday, 4th July.--... William finished 'The Leech-Gatherer' to-day."

  "Monday, 5th July.--I copied out 'The Leech-Gatherer' for Coleridge,
  and for us."

From these extracts it is clear that Dorothy Wordsworth considered the
poem as "finished" on the 7th of May, and on the 9th she sent a copy to
Coleridge; but that it was not till the 4th of July that it was really
finished, and then a second copy was forwarded to Coleridge. It is
impossible to say from which of the two MSS. sent to him Coleridge
transcribed the copy which he forwarded to Sir George Beaumont. From
that copy of a copy (which is now amongst the Beaumont MSS. at
Coleorton) the various readings given, on Coleridge's authority, in the
notes to the poem, were obtained some years ago.

The Fenwick note to the poem illustrates Wordsworth's habit of blending
in one description details which were originally separate, both as to
time and place. The scenery and the incidents of the poem are alike
composite. As he tells us that he met the leech-gatherer a few hundred
yards from Dove Cottage, the "lonely place" with its "pool, bare to the
eye of heaven," at once suggests White Moss Common and its small tarn;
but he adds that, in the opening stanzas of the poem, he is describing a
state of feeling he was in, when crossing the fells at the foot of
Ullswater to Askam, and that the image of the hare "running races in her
mirth," with the glittering mist accompanying her, was observed by him,
not on White Moss Common, but in one of the ridges of Moor Divock. To H.
C. Robinson he said of the "Leech-Gatherer" (Sept. 10, 1816), that "he
gave to his poetic character powers of mind which his original did not
possess." (Robinson's 'Diary', etc., vol. ii. p. 24.)

One of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  I        There was a roaring in the wind all night;
           The rain came heavily and fell in floods;
           But now the sun is rising calm and bright;
           The birds are singing in the distant woods;
           Over his own sweet voice the Stock-dove broods;             5
           The Jay makes answer as the Magpie chatters;
           And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of waters.

  II       All things that love the sun are out of doors;
           The sky rejoices in the morning's birth;
           The grass is bright with rain-drops;--on the moors         10
           The hare is running races in her mirth;
           And with her feet she from the plashy earth
           Raises a mist; that, [1] glittering in the sun,
           Runs with her all the way, wherever she doth run.

  III      I was a Traveller then upon the moor;                      15
           I saw the hare that raced about with joy;
           I heard the woods and distant waters roar;
           Or heard them not, as happy as a boy:
           The pleasant season did my heart employ:
           My old remembrances went from me wholly;                   20
           And all the ways of men, so vain and melancholy.

  IV       But, as it sometimes chanceth, from the might
           Of joy in minds that can no further go,
           As high as we have mounted in delight
           In our dejection do we sink as low;                        25
           To me that morning did it happen so;
           And fears and fancies thick upon me came;
           Dim sadness--and blind thoughts, I knew not, nor could name.

  V        I heard the sky-lark warbling [2] in the sky;
           And I bethought me of the playful hare:                    30
           Even such a happy Child of earth am I;
           Even as these blissful [3] creatures do I fare;
           Far from the world I walk, and from all care;
           But there may come another day to me--
           Solitude, pain of heart, distress, and poverty.            35

  VI       My whole life I have lived in pleasant thought,
           As if life's business were a summer mood;
           As if all needful things would come unsought
           To genial faith, still rich in genial good; [4]
           But how can He expect that others should                   40
           Build for him, sow for him, and at his call
           Love him, who for himself will take no heed at all? [A]

  VII      I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous Boy,
           The sleepless Soul that perished in his pride; [5]
           Of Him who walked in glory and in joy                      45
           Following his plough, along the mountain-side: [6]
           By our own spirits are we deified:
           We Poets in our youth begin in gladness;
           But thereof come [7] in the end despondency and madness.

  VIII     Now, whether it were [8] by peculiar grace,                50
           A leading from above, a something given,
           Yet it befel, that, in this [9] lonely place,
           When I with these untoward thoughts had striven,
           Beside a pool bare to the eye of heaven [10]
           I saw [11] a Man before me unawares:                       55
           The oldest man he seemed that ever wore grey hairs.
           [12]

  IX       As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie
           Couched on the bald top of an eminence;
           Wonder to all who [13] do the same espy,
           By what means it could thither come, and whence;           60
           So that it seems a thing endued with sense:
           Like a sea-beast crawled forth, that [14] on a shelf
           Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun itself;

  X        Such seemed this Man, not all alive nor dead,
           Nor all asleep--in his extreme old age:                    65
           His body was bent double, feet and head
           Coming together in life's pilgrimage; [15]
           As if some dire constraint of pain, or rage
           Of sickness felt by him in times long past,
           A more than human weight upon his frame [16] had cast.     70

  XI       Himself he propped, limbs, body, and pale face, [17]
           Upon a long grey staff of shaven wood:
           And, still as I drew near with gentle pace,
           Upon the margin of that moorish flood [18]
           Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood,                   75
           That heareth not the loud winds when they call;
           And moveth all together, if it move [19] at all.
           [20]


  XII      At length, himself unsettling, he the pond
           Stirred with his staff, and fixedly did look
           Upon the muddy water, which he conned,                     80
           As if he had been reading in a book:
           And now a stranger's privilege I took; [21]
           And, drawing to his side, to him did say,
           "This morning gives us promise of a glorious day."

  XIII     A gentle answer did the old Man make,                      85
           In courteous speech which forth he slowly drew:
           And him with further words I thus bespake,
           "What occupation do you there pursue? [22
           This is a lonesome place for one like [23] you."
           Ere he replied, a flash of mild surprise                   90
           Broke from the sable orbs of his yet-vivid eyes. [24] [B]

  XIV      His words came feebly, from a feeble chest,
           But [25] each in solemn order followed each,
           With something of a lofty [26] utterance drest--
           Choice word [27] and measured phrase, above [27] the reach 95
           Of ordinary men; a stately speech;
           Such as grave Livers do in Scotland use,
           Religious men, who give to God and man their dues.

  XV       He told, that to these waters he had come [28]
           To gather leeches, being old and poor:                    100
           Employment hazardous and wearisome!
           And he had many hardships to endure: [29]
           From pond to pond he roamed, from moor to moor;
           Housing, with God's good help, by choice or chance;
           And in this way he gained an honest maintenance.          105

  XVI      The old Man still stood talking by my side;
           But now [30] his voice to me was like a stream
           Scarce heard; nor word from word could I divide;
           And the whole body of the Man did seem
           Like one whom I had met with in a dream;                  110
           Or like a man from some far region sent,
           To give me human strength, by apt admonishment. [31]

  XVII     My former thoughts returned: the fear that kills;
           And [32] hope that is unwilling to be fed;
           Cold, pain, and labour, and all fleshly ills;             115
           And mighty Poets in their misery dead.
--Perplexed, and longing to be comforted, [33]
           My question eagerly did I renew,
           "How is it that you live, and what is it you do?" [34]

  XVIII    He with a smile did then his words repeat;                120
           And said, that, gathering leeches, far and wide
           He travelled; stirring thus about his feet
           The waters of the pools where they abide. [35]
           "Once I could meet with them on every side;
           But they have dwindled long by slow decay;                125
           Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may." [36]

  XIX      While he was talking thus, the lonely place,
           The old Man's shape, and speech--all troubled me:
           In my mind's eye I seemed to see him pace
           About the weary moors continually,                        130
           Wandering about alone and silently.
           While I these thoughts within myself pursued,
           He, having made a pause, the same discourse renewed.

  XX       And soon [37] with this he other matter blended,
           Cheerfully uttered, with demeanour kind,                  135
           But stately in the main; and when he ended, [38]
           I could have laughed myself to scorn to find
           In that decrepit Man so firm a mind.
           "God," said I, "be my help and stay secure;
           I'll think of the Leech-gatherer on the lonely moor!"     140


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  ... which, ...    1807.

And in MS. letter from Coleridge to Sir George Beaumont, 1802.[i]]



[Variant 2:

1820.

  ... singing ...     1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  ... happy ...       MS. 1802.]


[Variant 4:

1807.

  And they who lived in genial faith found nought
  that grew more willingly than genial good;      MS. 1802.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  ... who perished in his pride;        MS. 1802.

  ... that perished in its pride;           1807.]


[Variant 6:

1820.

  Behind his plough, upon the mountain-side: 1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

  ... comes ...     1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 8:

1807.

  ... was ...       MS. 1802.]


[Variant 9:

1807.

  ... that ...      MS. 1802.]


[Variant 10:

1820.

  When up and down my fancy thus was driven,
  And I with these untoward thoughts had striven,      1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 11:

1807.

  I spied ...       MS. 1802.]


[Variant 12:

  My course I stopped as soon as I espied
  The Old Man in that naked wilderness:
  Close by a Pond, upon the further side, [i]
  He stood alone: a minute's space I guess
  I watch'd him, he continuing motionless:
  To the Pool's further margin then I drew;
  He being all the while before me full in view. [ii]       1807.

This stanza, which appeared in the editions of 1807 and 1815, was, on
Coleridge's advice, omitted from subsequent ones.]


[Variant 13:

1807.

  ... that ...      MS. 1802.]


[Variant 14:

1820.

  ... which ...      1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 15:

1820.

  ... in their pilgrimage     1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 16:

1807.

  ... his age ...      MS. 1802.]


[Variant 17:

1836.

  Himself he propp'd, both body, limbs, and face,      MS. 1802.

  ... his body, ...                                        1807.]


[Variant 18:

1820.

  Beside the little pond or moorish flood      1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 19.

1807.


  ... moves . . MS. 1802.]


[Variant 20.

  He wore a Cloak the same as women wear
  As one whose blood did needful comfort lack;
  His face look'd pale as if it had grown fair;
  And, furthermore he had upon his back,
  Beneath his cloak, a round and bulky Pack;
  A load of wool or raiment as might seem.
  That on his shoulders lay as if it clave to him.

This stanza appeared only in MS. 1802.]


[Variant 21.

1820.

  And now such freedom as I could I took;        1807.

And Ms. 1802.]


[Variant 22.

1820.

  "What kind of work is that which you pursue?    1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 23.

1807.

  ... for such as ... MS.]


[Variant 24.

1836.

  He answer'd me with pleasure and surprize;
  And there was, while he spake, a fire about his eyes.  1807.

And MS. 1802.

  He answered, while a flash of mild surprise
  Broke from the sable orbs of his yet-vivid eyes.       1820.]


[Variant 25.

1820.

  Yet ...    1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 26.

1807.

  ... pompous ...    MS. 1802.]


[Variant 27.

1807.

  ...words ...  MS.

  ...beyond ... MS. 1802.]


[Variant 28.

1827.

  He told me that he to the pond had come ...   MS. 1802.

  ....this pond ...                                 1807.]


[Variant 29.

1807.

  This was his calling, better far than some,
  Though he had ...... MS. 1802.]



[Variant 30:

1807.

  But soon ...      MS. 1802.]


[Variant 31:

1827.

  ... and strong admonishment.      1807.

  ... by strong admonishment.       1820.]


[Variant 32:

1815.

  The ...       1807.

And MS. 1802.]


[Variant 33:

1820.

  And now, not knowing what the Old Man had said,       1807.

And MS. 1802.

  But now, perplex'd by what the Old Man had said,      1815.]


[Variant 34.

1807.

  ... live? what is it that you do?"       MS. 1802.]


[Variant 35:

1827.

  And said, that wheresoe'er they might be spied
  He gather'd Leeches, stirring at his feet
  The waters in the Ponds ...      MS. 1802.

  And said, that, gathering Leeches, far and wide
  He travelled; stirring thus about his feet
  The waters of the Ponds ...          1807.]


[Variant 36:

1807.

  Once he could meet with them on every side;
  But fewer they became from day to day,
  And so his means of life before him died away.      MS. 1802.]


[Variant 37:

1807.

  And now ...       MS. 1802.]


[Variant 38:

1807.

  Which he delivered with demeanour kind,
  Yet stately ...       MS. 1802.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Variant i:

  ... hither side,      MS. 1802.]


[Sub-Variant ii:

  He all the while before me being full in view.      MS. 1802.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Some have thought that Wordsworth had S.T.C. in his mind,
in writing this stanza. I cannot agree with this. The value and interest
of the poem would be lessened by our imagining that Wordsworth's heart
never failed him; and that, when he appears to moralise at his own
expense, he was doing so at Coleridge's. Besides, the date of this poem,
taken in connection with entries in the Grasmere Journal of Dorothy
Wordsworth, makes it all but certain that Coleridge was not referred
to.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare in 'The Matron of Jedborough and her Husband', p.
417, ll. 66-69:

  'Some inward trouble suddenly
  Broke from the Matron's strong black eye--
  A remnant of uneasy light,
  A flash of something over-bright!'

Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote i: Additional variants obtained from this source are
inserted as "MS. 1802."--Ed.]


The late Bishop of Lincoln, in the 'Memoirs' of his uncle (vol. i. pp.
172, 173), quotes from a letter, written by Wordsworth "to some friends,
which has much interest as bearing on this poem. [C] The following are
extracts from it:

  "It is not a matter of indifference whether you are pleased with his
  figure and employment, it may be comparatively whether you are pleased
  with _this Poem_; but it is of the utmost importance that you should
  have had pleasure in contemplating the fortitude, independence,
  persevering spirit, and the general moral dignity of this old man's
  character." Again, "I will explain to you, in prose, my feelings in
  writing _that_ poem.... I describe myself as having been exalted to
  the highest pitch of delight by the joyousness and beauty of nature;
  and then as depressed, even in the midst of those beautiful objects,
  to the lowest dejection and despair. A young poet in the midst of the
  happiness of nature is described as overwhelmed by the thoughts of the
  miserable reverses which have befallen the happiest of all men, viz.
  poets. I think of this till I am so deeply impressed with it, that I
  consider the manner in which I was rescued from my dejection and
  despair almost as an interposition of Providence. A person reading the
  poem with feelings like mine will have been awed and controlled,
  expecting something spiritual or supernatural. What is brought
  forward? A lonely place, 'a pond, by which an old man _was_, far from
  all house or home:' not _stood_, nor _sat_, but _was_--the figure
  presented in the most naked simplicity possible. This feeling of
  spirituality or supernaturalness is again referred to as being strong
  in my mind in this passage. How came he here? thought I, or what can
  he be doing? I then describe him, whether ill or well is not for me to
  judge with perfect confidence; but this I _can_ confidently affirm,
  that though I believe God has given me a strong imagination, I cannot
  conceive a figure more impressive than that of an old man like this,
  the survivor of a wife and ten children, travelling alone among the
  mountains and all lonely places, carrying with him his own fortitude
  and the necessities which an unjust state of society has laid upon
  him. You speak of his speech as tedious. Every thing is tedious when
  one does not read with the feelings of the author. 'The Thorn' is
  tedious to hundreds; and so is 'The Idiot Boy' to hundreds. It is in
  the character of the old man to tell his story, which an impatient
  reader must feel tedious. But, good heavens! such a figure, in such a
  place; a pious, self-respecting, miserably infirm and pleased old man
  telling such a tale!"

Ed.


[Footnote A: It is unfortunate that in this, as in many other similar
occasions in these delightful volumes by the poet's nephew, the
reticence as to names--warrantable perhaps in 1851, so soon after the
poet's death--has now deprived the world of every means of knowing to
whom many of Wordsworth's letters were addressed. Professor Dowden asks
about it--and very naturally:

  "Was it the letter to Mary and Sara" (Hutchinson) "about 'The
  Leech-Gatherer,' mentioned in Dorothy's Journal of 14th June
  1802?"

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"I GRIEVED FOR BUONAPARTE"


Composed May 21, 1802.--Published 1807 [A]


[In the cottage of Town-end, one afternoon in 1801, my sister read to me
the sonnets of Milton. I had long been well acquainted with them, but I
was particularly struck on that occasion with the dignified simplicity
and majestic harmony that runs through most of them--in character so
totally different from the Italian, and still more so from Shakespeare's
fine sonnets. I took fire, if I may be allowed to say so, and produced
three sonnets the same afternoon, the first I ever wrote, except an
irregular one at school. Of these three the only one I distinctly
remember is 'I grieved for Buonaparte, etc.'; one of the others was
never written down; the third, which was I believe preserved, I cannot
particularise.--I.F.]

One of the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty," afterwards called "Poems
dedicated to National Independence and Liberty." From the edition of
1815 onwards, it bore the title '1801'.--Ed.




  I grieved for Buonaparte, with a vain
  And an unthinking grief! The tenderest mood [1]
  Of that Man's mind--what can it be? what food
  Fed his first hopes? what knowledge could _he_ gain?
  'Tis not in battles that from youth we train                  5
  The Governor who must be wise and good,
  And temper with the sternness of the brain
  Thoughts motherly, and meek as womanhood.
  Wisdom doth live with children round her knees:
  Books, leisure, perfect freedom, and the talk                10
  Man holds with week-day man in the hourly walk
  Of the mind's business: these are the degrees
  By which true Sway doth mount; this is the stalk
  True Power doth grow on; and her rights are these.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

                  ... grief! the vital blood
  Of that man's mind, what can it be? What food
  Fed his first hopes? what knowledge could he gain?     1802.

                  ... grief! for, who aspires
  To genuine greatness but from just desires,
  And knowledge such as _He_ could never gain?           1815.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: It had twice seen the light previously in 'The Morning
Post', first on September 16, 1802, unsigned, and again on January 29,
1803, when it was signed W. L. D.--Ed.]


Wordsworth's date 1801, in the Fenwick note, should have been 1802. His
sister writes, in her Journal of 1802:

  "May 21.--W. wrote two sonnets on Buonaparte, after I had read
  Milton's sonnets to him."

The "irregular" sonnet, written "at school," to which Wordsworth refers,
is probably the one published in the 'European Magazine' in 1787, vol.
xi. p. 202, and signed Axiologus.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





A FAREWELL


Composed May 29, 1802.--Published 1815


[Composed just before my Sister and I went to fetch Mrs. Wordsworth from
Gallow-hill, near Scarborough.--I.F.]

This was one of the "Poems founded on the Affections." It was published
in 1815 and in 1820 without a title, but with the sub-title 'Composed in
the Year 1802'. In 1827 and 1832 it was called 'A Farewell', to which
the sub-title was added. The sub-title was omitted in 1836, and
afterwards.--Ed.




  Farewell, thou little Nook of mountain-ground,
  Thou rocky corner in the lowest stair
  Of that magnificent temple which doth bound
  One side of our whole vale with grandeur rare;
  Sweet garden-orchard, eminently fair,                            5
  The loveliest spot that man hath ever found,
  Farewell!--we leave thee to Heaven's peaceful care,
  Thee, and the Cottage which thou dost surround.

  Our boat is safely anchored by the shore,
  And there will safely ride [1] when we are gone;                10
  The flowering shrubs that deck our humble door [2]
  Will prosper, though untended and alone:
  Fields, goods, and far-off chattels we have none:
  These narrow bounds contain our private store
  Of things earth makes, and sun doth shine upon;                 15
  Here are they in our sight--we have no more.

  Sunshine and shower be with you, bud and bell!
  For two months now in vain we shall be sought;
  We leave you here in solitude to dwell
  With these our latest gifts of tender thought;                  20
  Thou, like the morning, in thy saffron coat,
  Bright gowan, and marsh-marigold, farewell!
  Whom from the borders of the Lake we brought,
  And placed together near our rocky Well.

  We go for One to whom ye will be dear;                          25
  And she will prize this Bower, this Indian shed,
  Our own contrivance, Building without peer!
--A gentle Maid, whose heart is lowly bred,
  Whose pleasures are in wild fields gathered,
  With joyousness, and with a thoughtful cheer,                   30
  Will come [3] to you; to you herself will wed;
  And love the blessed life that [4] we lead here.

  Dear Spot! which we have watched with tender heed,
  Bringing thee chosen plants and blossoms blown
  Among the distant mountains, flower and weed,                   35
  Which thou hast taken to thee as thy own.
  Making all kindness registered and known;
  Thou for our sakes, though Nature's child indeed,
  Fair in thyself and beautiful alone,
  Hast taken gifts which thou dost little need.                   40

  And O most constant, yet most fickle Place,
  That hast thy wayward moods, as thou dost show
  To them who look not daily on [5] thy face;
  Who, being loved, in love no bounds dost know,
  And say'st, when we forsake thee, "Let them go!"                45
  Thou easy-hearted Thing, with thy wild race
  Of weeds and flowers, till we return be slow,
  And travel with the year at a soft pace.

  Help us to tell Her tales of years gone by,
  And this sweet spring, the best beloved and best;               50
  Joy will be flown in its mortality;
  Something must stay to tell us of the rest.
  Here, thronged with primroses, the steep rock's breast
  Glittered at evening like a starry sky;
  And in this bush our sparrow built her nest,                    55
  Of which I sang [6] one song that will not die. [A]

  O happy Garden! whose seclusion deep
  Hath been so friendly to industrious hours;
  And to soft slumbers, that did gently steep
  Our spirits, carrying with them dreams of flowers,              60
  And wild notes warbled among leafy bowers;
  Two burning months let summer overleap,
  And, coming back with Her who will be ours,
  Into thy bosom we again shall creep.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  And safely she will ride ...      1815.

  ... will she ...                  1832.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  ... that decorate our door      1815.]


[Variant 3:

1820.

  She'll come ...       1815.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  ... which ...      1815]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  ... in ...       1815.]


[Variant 6:

1832.

  ... sung ...       1815.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See 'The Sparrow's Nest', p. 236.--Ed.]


  "May 29.--William finished his poem on going for Mary. I wrote it out.
  A sweet day. We nailed up the honeysuckle and hoed the scarlet beans."

She added on the 31st,

  "I wrote out the poem on our departure, which he seemed to have
  finished;"

and on June 13th,

  "William has been altering the poem to Mary this morning."

The "little Nook of mountain-ground" is in much the same condition now,
as it was in 1802. The "flowering shrubs" and the "rocky well" still
exist, and "the steep rock's breast" is "thronged with primroses" in
spring. The "bower" is gone; but, where it used to be, a seat is now
erected.

The Dove Cottage orchard is excellently characterised in Mr. Stopford
Brooke's pamphlet describing it (1890). See also 'The Green Linnet', p.
367, with the note appended to it, and Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere
Journal, _passim_.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"THE SUN HAS LONG BEEN SET"


Composed June 8, 1802.--Published 1807


[This _Impromptu_ appeared, many years ago, among the Author's poems,
from which, in subsequent editions, it was excluded. [A] It is
reprinted, at the request of the Friend in whose presence the lines were
thrown off.--I.F.]

One of the "Evening Voluntaries."--Ed.




  The sun has long been set,
    The stars are out by twos and threes,
  The little birds are piping yet
  Among the bushes and trees; [1]
  There's a cuckoo, and one or two thrushes,                  5
  And a far-off wind that rushes,
  And a sound of water that gushes, [2]
  And the cuckoo's sovereign cry
  Fills all the hollow of the sky.

  Who would go "parading"                                    10
  In London, "and masquerading," [B]
  On such a night of June
  With that beautiful soft half-moon,
  And all these innocent blisses?
  On such a night as this is!                                15


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  ... and the trees;      1836.

The edition of 1837 returns to the text of 1807.]


[Variant 2:

1835.

  And a noise of wind that rushes,
  With a noise of water that gushes;      1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: It appeared in 1807 as No. II. of "Moods of my own Mind,"
and not again till the publication of "Yarrow Revisited" in 1835.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare:

  'At operas and plays parading,
  Mortgaging, gambling, masquerading.'

Burns, 'The Two Dogs, a Tale', II. 124-5.--Ed.]


  "June 8th (1802).--After tea William came out and walked, and wrote
  that poem, 'The sun has long been set,' etc. He walked on our own
  path, and wrote the lines; he called me into the orchard and there
  repeated them to me."

(Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal.) The "Friend in whose presence the lines
were thrown off," was his sister.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





COMPOSED UPON WESTMINSTER BRIDGE, SEPTEMBER 3, 1802


Composed July 31, 1802.--Published 1807


[Written on the roof of a coach, on my way to France.--I.F.]

One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets."--Ed.



  Earth has not any thing to show more fair:
  Dull would he be of soul [1] who could pass by
  A sight so touching in its majesty:
  This City now doth, like a garment, wear
  The beauty of the morning; silent, bare,                         5
  Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
  Open unto the fields, and to the sky;
  All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
  Never did sun more beautifully steep
  In his first splendour, valley, rock, or hill;                  10
  Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
  The river glideth at his own sweet will:
  Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
  And all that mighty heart is lying still!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  ... heart ...      MS.]



The date which Wordsworth gave to this sonnet on its first publication
in 1807, viz. September 3, 1803,--and which he retained in all
subsequent editions of his works till 1836,--is inaccurate. He left
London for Dover, on his way to Calais, on the 31st of July 1802. The
sonnet was written that morning as he travelled towards Dover. The
following record of the journey is preserved in his sister's Journal:

  "July 30. [A]--Left London between five and six o'clock of the morning
  outside the Dover coach. A beautiful morning. The city, St. Paul's,
  with the river--a multitude of little boats, made a beautiful sight as
  we crossed _Westminster Bridge_; the houses not overhung by their
  clouds of smoke, and were hung out endlessly; yet the sun shone so
  brightly, with such a pure light, that there was something like the
  purity of one of Nature's own grand spectacles."

This sonnet underwent no change in successive editions.

In illustration of it, an anecdote of the late Bishop of St. David's may
be given, as reported by Lord Coleridge.

  "In the great debate on the abolition of the Irish Establishment in
  1869, the Bishop of St. David's, Dr. Thirlwall, had made a very
  remarkable speech, and had been kept till past daybreak in the House
  of Lords, before the division was over, and he was able to walk home.
  He was then an old man, and in failing health. Some time after, he was
  asked whether he had not run some risk to his health, and whether he
  did not feel much exhausted. 'Yes,' he said, 'perhaps so; but I was
  more than repaid by walking out upon Westminster Bridge after the
  division, seeing London in the morning light as Wordsworth saw it, and
  repeating to myself his noble sonnet as I walked home.'"

This anecdote was told to the Wordsworth Society, at its meeting on the
3rd of May 1882, after a letter had been read by the Secretary, from Mr.
Robert Spence Watson, recording the following similar experience:

  "... As confirming the perfect truth of Wordsworth's description of
  the external aspects of a scene, and the way in which he reached its
  inmost soul, I may tell you what happened to me, and may have happened
  to many others. Many years ago, I think it was in 1859, I chanced to
  be passing (in a pained and depressed state of mind, occasioned by the
  death of a friend) over Waterloo Bridge at half-past three on a lovely
  June morning. It was broad daylight, and I was alone. Never when alone
  in the remotest recesses of the Alps, with nothing around me but the
  mountains, or upon the plains of Africa, alone with the wonderful
  glory of the southern night, have I seen anything to approach the
  solemnity--the soothing solemnity--of the city, sleeping under the
  early sun:

    'Earth has not any thing to show more fair.'

  "How simply, yet how perfectly, Wordsworth has interpreted it! It was
  a happy thing for us that the Dover coach left at so untimely an hour.
  It was this sonnet, I think, that first opened my eyes to Wordsworth's
  greatness as a poet. Perhaps nothing that he has written shows more
  strikingly the vast sympathy which is his peculiar dower."

Ed.

[Footnote A: This is an error of date. Saturday, the day of their
departure from London, was the 31st of July.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





COMPOSED BY THE SEA-SIDE, NEAR CALAIS, AUGUST, 1802


Composed August, 1802.--Published 1807


One of the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; re-named in 1845, "Poems
dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  Fair Star of evening, Splendour of the west,
  Star of my Country!--on the horizon's brink
  Thou hangest, stooping, as might seem, to sink
  On England's bosom; yet well pleased to rest,
  Meanwhile, and be to her a glorious crest                        5
  Conspicuous to the Nations. Thou, I think,
  Should'st be my Country's emblem; and should'st wink,
  Bright Star! with laughter on her banners, drest
  In thy fresh beauty. There! that dusky spot
  Beneath thee, that is England; there she lies. [1]              10
  Blessings be on you both! one hope, one lot,
  One life, one glory!--I, with many a fear
  For my dear Country, many heartfelt sighs,
  Among men who do not love her, linger here.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  ... it is England; there it lies.      1807.]


This sonnet, and the seven that follow it, were written during
Wordsworth's residence at Calais, in the month of August, 1802. The
following extract from his sister's Journal illustrates it:

  "We arrived at _Calais_ at four o'clock on Sunday morning the 31st of
  July. We had delightful walks after the heat of the day was
  passed--seeing far off in the west the coast of England, like a cloud,
  crested with Dover Castle, the evening Star, and the glory of the sky;
  the reflections in the water were more beautiful than the sky itself;
  purple waves brighter than precious stones, for ever melting away upon
  the sands."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





CALAIS, AUGUST, 1802


Composed August 7, 1802--Published 1807 [A]


One of the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; re-named in 1845, "Poems
dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  Is it a reed that's shaken by the wind,
  Or what is it that ye go forth to see?
  Lords, lawyers, statesmen, squires of low degree,
  Men known, and men unknown, sick, lame, and blind,
  Post forward all, like creatures of one kind,                     5
  With first-fruit offerings crowd to bend the knee
  In France, before the new-born Majesty.
  'Tis ever thus. Ye men of prostrate mind, [1]
  A seemly reverence may be paid to power;
  But that's a loyal virtue, never sown                            10
  In haste, nor springing with a transient shower:
  When truth, when sense, when liberty were flown,
  What hardship had it been to wait an hour?
  Shame on you, feeble Heads, to slavery prone!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  Thus fares it ever. Men of prostrate mind!      1803.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This sonnet was first published in 'The Morning Post', Jan.
29, 1803, under the signature W. L. D., along with the one beginning, "I
grieved for Buonaparte, with a vain," and was afterwards printed in the
1807 edition of the Poems. Mr. T. Hutchinson (Dublin) suggests that the
W. L. D. stood either for _Wordsworthius Libertatis Defensor_, or (more
likely) _Wordsworthii Libertati Dedicatunt_ (carmen).--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





COMPOSED NEAR CALAIS, ON THE ROAD LEADING TO ARDRES, AUGUST 7, 1802 [A]


Composed August, 1802.--Published 1807


One of the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; re-named in 1845, "Poems
dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  Jones! as [1] from Calais southward you and I
  Went pacing side by side, this public Way
  Streamed with the pomp of a too-credulous day, [B]
  When faith was pledged to new-born Liberty: [2]
  A homeless sound of joy was in the sky:                          5
  From hour to hour the antiquated Earth, [3]
  Beat like the heart of Man: songs, garlands, mirth, [4]
  Banners, and happy faces, far and nigh!
  And now, sole register that these things were,
  Two solitary greetings have I heard,                            10
  "_Good morrow, Citizen!_" a hollow word,
  As if a dead man spake it! Yet despair
  Touches me not, though pensive as a bird
  Whose vernal coverts winter hath laid bare. [5]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  ... when ...       1807.

  ... while ...      1820.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  Travell'd on foot together; then this Way,
  Which I am pacing now, was like the May
  With festivals of new-born Liberty:              1807.

  Where I am walking now ...                         MS.

  Urged our accordant steps, this public Way
  Streamed with the pomp of a too-credulous day,
  When faith was pledged to new-born Liberty:      1820.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  The antiquated Earth, as one might say,      1807.

  The antiquated Earth, hopeful and gay,       1837.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

  ... garlands, play,      1807.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  I feel not: happy am I as a Bird:
  Fair seasons yet will come, and hopes as fair.      1807.

  I feel not: jocund as a warbling Bird;              1820.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In the editions of 1807 to 1837 this is a sub-title, the
chief title being 'To a Friend'. In the editions of 1840-1843, the chief
title is retained in the Table of Contents, but is erased in the
text.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: 14th July 1790.--W. W. 1820.]


This sonnet, originally entitled 'To a Friend, composed near Calais, on
the Road leading to Ardres, August 7th, 1802', was addressed to Robert
Jones, of Plas-yn-llan, near Ruthin, Denbighshire, a brother collegian
at Cambridge, and afterwards a fellow of St. John's College, and
incumbent of Soulderne, near Deddington, in Oxfordshire. It was to him
that Wordsworth dedicated his 'Descriptive Sketches', which record their
wanderings together in Switzerland; and it is to the pedestrian tour,
undertaken by the two friends in the long vacation of 1790, that he
refers in the above sonnet. The character of Jones is sketched in the
poem written in 1800, beginning:

    'I marvel how Nature could ever find space,' [A]

and his parsonage in Oxfordshire is described in the sonnet--

    'Where holy ground begins, unhallowed ends,
    Is marked by no distinguishable line.'

The following note on Jones was appended to the edition of
1837:

  "This excellent Person, one of my earliest and dearest friends, died
  in the year 1835. We were under-graduates together of the same year,
  at the same college; and companions in many a delightful ramble
  through his own romantic Country of North Wales. Much of the latter
  part of his life he passed in comparative solitude; which I know was
  often cheered by remembrance of our youthful adventures, and of the
  beautiful regions which, at home and abroad, we had visited together.
  Our long friendship was never subject to a moment's
  interruption,--and, while revising these volumes for the last time, I
  have been so often reminded of my loss, with a not unpleasing sadness,
  that I trust the Reader will excuse this passing mention of a Man who
  well deserves from me something more than so brief a notice. Let me
  only add, that during the middle part of his life he resided many
  years (as Incumbent of the Living) at a Parsonage in Oxfordshire,
  which is the subject of one of the 'Miscellaneous Sonnets.'"

Ed.


[Footnote A: See p. 208 ['A Character'].--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





CALAIS, AUGUST 15, 1802


Composed August 15, 1802.--Published 1807 [A]


One of the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; re-named in 1845, "Poems
dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.



  Festivals have I seen that were not names:
  This is young Buonaparte's natal day,
  And his is henceforth an established sway--
  Consul for life. With worship France proclaims
  Her approbation, and with pomps and games.                      5
  Heaven grant that other Cities may be gay!
  Calais is not: and I have bent my way
  To the [1] sea-coast, noting that each man frames
  His business as he likes. Far other show
  My youth here witnessed, in a prouder time; [2]                10
  The senselessness of joy was then sublime!
  Happy is he, who, caring not for Pope,
  Consul, or King, can sound himself to know
  The destiny of Man, and live in hope.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  ... this ...      1803.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  ... Another time
  That was, when I was here twelve years ago.      1803.

  ... long years ago:                              1807.

  ... Far different time
  That was, which here I witnessed, long ago;      1820.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: It had appeared in 'The Morning Post', February 26, 1803,
under the initials W. L. D.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"IT IS A BEAUTEOUS EVENING, CALM AND FREE"


Composed August, 1802.--Published 1807


[This was composed on the beach near Calais, in the autumn of 1802.--I.
F.]

One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets." In 1807 it was No. 19 of that
series.--Ed.




  It is a beauteous evening, calm and free, [1]
  The holy time is quiet as a Nun
  Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
  Is sinking down in its tranquillity;
  The gentleness of heaven broods o'er the Sea: [2]                5
  Listen! [3] the mighty Being is awake,
  And doth with his eternal motion make
  A sound like thunder--everlastingly.
  Dear Child! dear Girl! that walkest with me here, [A]
  If thou appear untouched by solemn thought, [4]                 10
  Thy nature is not therefore less divine:
  Thou liest in Abraham's bosom all the year;
  And worshipp'st at the Temple's inner shrine,
  God being with thee when we know it not. [B]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  Air sleeps,--from strife or stir the clouds are free;     1837.

  A fairer face of evening cannot be;                       1840.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1807.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  ... is on the Sea:     1807.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  But list! ...     1837.

The text of 1840 returns to that of 1807.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

  Dear Child! dear Girl! that walkest with me here,
  If thou appear'st untouch'd by solemn thought,        1807.

  Dear Child! dear happy Girl! if thou appear
  Heedless--untouched with awe or serious thought,      1837.

  Heedless-unawed, untouched with serious thought,      1838.

The text of 1840 returns to that of 1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: I thought, for some time, that the "girl" referred to was
Dorothy Wordsworth. Her brother used to speak, and to write, of her
under many names, "Emily," "Louisa," etc.; and to call her a "child" in
1802--a "child of Nature" she was to the end of her days--or a "girl,"
seemed quite natural. However, a more probable suggestion was made by
Mr. T. Hutchinson to Professor Dowden, that it refers to the girl
Caroline mentioned in Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal.

  "We arrived at Calais at four o'clock on Sunday morning, the 3rd of
  July.... We found out Annette and C., chez Madame Avril dans la rue de
  la Tete d'or. The weather was very hot. We walked by the shore almost
  every evening with Annette and Caroline, or William and I alone.... It
  was beautiful on the calm hot night to see the little boats row out of
  harbour with wings of fire, and the sail-boats with the fiery track
  which they cut as they went along, and which closed up after them with
  a hundred thousand sparkles and streams of glowworm light. Caroline
  was delighted."

I have been unable to discover who Annette and Caroline were. Dorothy
Wordsworth frequently records in her Grasmere Journal that either
William, or she, "wrote to Annette," but who she was is unknown to
either the Wordsworth or the Hutchinson family.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare:

  'The Child is father of the Man, etc.'

p. 292.

Also S. T. C. in 'The Friend', iii. p. 46:

  'The sacred light of childhood,'

and 'The Prelude', book v. l. 507.      Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





ON THE EXTINCTION OF THE VENETIAN REPUBLIC


Composed August, 1802.--Published 1807


This and the following ten sonnets were included among the "Sonnets
dedicated to Liberty"; re-named in 1845, "Poems dedicated to National
Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  Once did She hold the gorgeous east in fee;
  And was the safeguard of the west: the worth
  Of Venice did not fall below her birth,
  Venice, the eldest Child of Liberty.
  She was a maiden City, bright and free;                        5
  No guile seduced, no force could violate;
  And, when she took unto herself a Mate,
  She must espouse the everlasting Sea. [A]
  And what if she had seen those glories fade,
  Those titles vanish, and that strength decay;                 10
  Yet shall some tribute of regret be paid
  When her long life hath reached its final day:
  Men are we, and must grieve when even the Shade
  Of that which once was great, is passed away.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage' (canto iv. II):

  'The spouseless Adriatic mourns her lord.'

Ed.]


  "Once did She hold the gorgeous east in fee."

The special glory of Venice dates from the conquest of Constantinople by
the Latins in 1202. The fourth Crusade--in which the French and
Venetians alone took part--started from Venice, in October 1202, under
the command of the Doge, Henry Dandolo. Its aim, however, was not the
recovery of Palestine, but the conquest of Constantinople. At the close
of the crusade, Venice received the Morea, part of Thessaly, the
Cyclades, many of the Byzantine cities, and the coasts of the
Hellespont, with three-eighths of the city of Constantinople itself, the
Doge taking the curious title of Duke of three-eighths of the Roman
Empire.

  "And was the safeguard of the west."

This may refer to the prominent part which Venice took in the Crusades,
or to the development of her naval power, which made her mistress of the
Mediterranean for many years, and an effective bulwark against invasions
from the East.

  "The eldest Child of Liberty."

The origin of the Venetian State was the flight of many of
the inhabitants of the mainland--on the invasion of Italy by
Attila--to the chain of islands that lie at the head of the
Adriatic.

  "In the midst of the waters, free, indigent, laborious, and
  inaccessible, they gradually coalesced into a republic: the first
  foundations of Venice were laid in the island of Rialto.... On the
  verge of the two empires the Venetians exult in the belief of
  primitive and perpetual independence."

Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire', chap. lx.

  "And, when she took unto herself a Mate,
  She must espouse the everlasting Sea."

In 1177, Pope Alexander III. appealed to the Venetian Republic for
protection against the German Emperor. The Venetians were successful in
a naval battle at Saboro, against Otho, the son of Frederick Barbarossa.
In return, the Pope presented the Doge Liani with a ring, with which he
told him to wed the Adriatic, that posterity might know that the sea was
subject to Venice, "as a bride is to her husband."

In September 1796, nearly six years before this sonnet was written, the
fate of the old Venetian Republic was sealed by the treaty of Campo
Formio. The French army under Napoleon had subdued Italy, and, having
crossed the Alps, threatened Vienna. To avert impending disaster, the
Emperor Francis arranged a treaty which extinguished the Venetian
Republic. He divided its territory between himself and Napoleon, Austria
retaining Istria, Dalmatia, and the left bank of the Adige in the
Venetian State, with the "maiden city" itself; France receiving the rest
of the territory and the Ionian Islands. Since the date of that treaty
the city has twice been annexed to Italy.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE KING OF SWEDEN


Composed August, 1802.--Published 1807



  The Voice of song from distant lands shall call
  To that great [1] King; shall hail the crowned Youth
  Who, taking counsel of unbending Truth,
  By one example hath set forth to all
  How they with dignity may stand; or fall,                         5
  If fall they must. Now, whither doth it tend?
  And what to him and his shall be the end?
  That thought is one which neither can appal
  Nor cheer him; for the illustrious Swede hath done
  The thing which ought to be; is raised _above_ [2]               10
  All consequences: work he hath begun
  Of fortitude, and piety, and love,
  Which all his glorious ancestors approve:
  The heroes bless him, him their rightful son.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  ... bold ...   In 1838 only.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  ... He stands _above_    1807.]


The following is Wordsworth's note to this sonnet, added in 1837:

  "In this and a succeeding Sonnet on the same subject, let me be
  understood as a Poet availing himself of the situation which the King
  of Sweden occupied, and of the principles AVOWED IN HIS MANIFESTOS; as
  laying hold of these advantages for the purpose of embodying moral
  truths. This remark might, perhaps, as well have been suppressed; for
  to those who may be in sympathy with the course of these Poems, it
  will be superfluous; and will, I fear, be thrown away upon that other
  class, whose besotted admiration of the intoxicated despot hereafter
  placed [A] in contrast with him, is the most melancholy evidence of
  degradation in British feeling and intellect which the times have
  furnished."

The king referred to is Gustavus IV., who was born in 1778, proclaimed
king in 1792, and died in 1837. His first public act after his accession
was to join in the coalition against Napoleon, and dislike of Napoleon
was the main-spring of his policy. It is to this that Wordsworth refers
in the sonnet:

  '... the illustrious Swede hath done
  The thing which ought to be ...'

It made him unpopular, however, and gave rise to a conspiracy against
him, and to his consequent abdication in 1809. He "died forgotten and in
poverty."--Ed.


[Footnote A: See the sonnet beginning "Call not the royal Swede
unfortunate," vol. iv. p. 224.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TO TOUSSAINT L'OUVERTURE


Composed August, 1802.--Published 1807 [A]




  Toussaint, the most unhappy man of men! [B]
  Whether the whistling Rustic tend his plough
  Within thy hearing, or thy head be now
  Pillowed in some deep dungeon's earless den;--[1]
  O miserable Chieftain! where and when                            5
  Wilt thou find patience? Yet die not; do thou
  Wear rather in thy bonds a cheerful brow:
  Though fallen thyself, never to rise again,
  Live, and take comfort. [2] Thou hast left behind
  Powers that will work for thee; air, earth, and skies;          10
  There's not a breathing of the common wind
  That will forget thee; thou hast great allies;
  Thy friends are exultations, agonies,
  And love, and man's unconquerable mind. [C]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  Whether the rural milk-maid by her cow
  Sing in thy hearing, or thou liest now
  Alone in some deep dungeon's earless den,         1803.

  Whether the all-cheering sun be free to shed
  His beams around thee, or thou rest thy head
  Pillowed in some dark dungeon's noisome den,      1815.

  Whether the whistling Rustic tend his plough
  Within thy hearing, or Thou liest now
  Buried in some deep dungeon's earless den;--1820.]


[Variant 2:

1807.

  ... Yet die not; be thou
  Life to thyself in death; with chearful brow
  Live, loving death, nor let one thought in ten
  Be painful to thee ...      1803.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: But previously printed in 'The Morning Post' of February 2,
1803, under the signature W. L. D.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Massinger, 'The Bondman', act I. scene iii. l. 8:

  'Her man of men, Timoleon.'

Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Rowe's 'Tamerlane', iii. 2:

  'But to subdue the unconquerable mind.'

Also Gray's poem 'The Progress of Poesy', ii. 2, l. 10:

  'Th' unconquerable Mind, and Freedom's holy flame.'

Ed.]



Francois Dominique Toussaint (who was surnamed L'Ouverture), the child
of African slaves, was born at St. Domingo in 1743. He was a Royalist in
political sympathy till 1794, when the decree of the French convention,
giving liberty to the slaves, brought him over to the side of the
Republic. He was made a general of division by Laveux, and succeeded in
taking the whole of the north of the island from the English. In 1796 he
was made chief of the French army of St. Domingo, and first the British
commander, and next the Spanish, surrendered everything to him. He
became governor of the island, which prospered under his rule. Napoleon,
however, in 1801, issued an edict re-establishing slavery in St.
Domingo. Toussaint professed obedience, but showed that he meant to
resist the edict. A fleet of fifty-four vessels was sent from France to
enforce it. Toussaint was proclaimed an outlaw. He surrendered, and was
received with military honours, but was treacherously arrested and sent
to Paris in June 1802, where he died, in April 1803, after ten months'
hardship in prison. He had been two months in prison when Wordsworth
addressed this sonnet to him.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





COMPOSED IN THE VALLEY NEAR DOVER, ON THE DAY OF LANDING


Composed August 30, 1802.--Published 1807




  Here, on our native soil, we breathe once more. [1]
  The cock that crows, the smoke that curls, that sound
  Of bells;--those boys who [2] in yon meadow-ground
  In white-sleeved shirts are playing; [A] and the roar
  Of the waves breaking on the chalky shore;--[3]                   5
  All, all are English. Oft have I looked round
  With joy in Kent's green vales; but never found
  Myself so satisfied in heart before.
  Europe is yet in bonds; but let that pass,
  Thought for another moment. Thou art free,                        10
  My Country! and 'tis joy enough and pride
  For one hour's perfect bliss, to tread the grass
  Of England once again, and hear and see,
  With such a dear Companion at my side.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  Dear fellow Traveller! here we are once more.        1807.]


[Variant 2:

1820.

  ... that ...        1807.]


[Variant 3:

1815.

  In white sleev'd shirts are playing by the score,
  And even this little River's gentle roar,        1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: At the beginning of Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Journal of a Tour
on the Continent' in 1820, she writes (July 10, 1820):

  "When within a mile of Dover saw crowds of people at a cricket match,
  the numerous combatants dressed in 'white-sleeved shirts;' and it was
  in the very same field, where, when we 'trod the grass of England once
  again,' twenty years ago, we had seen an assemblage of youths, engaged
  in the same sport, so very like the present that all might have been
  the same. (See my brother's sonnet.)"

Ed.]


Dorothy Wordsworth writes in her Journal,

  "On Sunday, the 29th of August, we left Calais, at twelve o'clock in
  the morning, and landed at Dover at one on Monday the 30th. It was
  very pleasant to me, when we were in the harbour at Dover, to breathe
  the fresh air, and to look up and see the stars among the ropes of the
  vessel. The next day was very hot, we bathed, and sat upon the Dover
  Cliffs, and looked upon France with many a melancholy and tender
  thought. We could see the shores almost as plain as if it were but an
  English lake. We mounted the coach, and arrived in London at six, the
  30th August."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





SEPTEMBER 1, 1802


Composed September 1, 1802.--Published 1807 [A]


Among the capricious acts of Tyranny that disgraced these times, was the
chasing of all Negroes from France by decree of the Government: we had a
Fellow-passenger who was one of the expelled.--W. W. 1827.




  We had a female Passenger who came [1]
  From Calais with us, spotless [2] in array,
  A white-robed Negro, [3] like a lady gay,
  Yet downcast [4] as a woman fearing blame;
  Meek, destitute, as seemed, of hope or aim [5]                     5
  She sate, from notice turning not away,
  But on all proffered intercourse did lay [6]
  A weight of languid speech, or to the same
  No sign of answer made by word or face:
  Yet still her eyes retained their tropic fire,                    10
  That, burning independent of the mind,
  Joined with the lustre of her rich attire
  To mock the Outcast--O ye Heavens, be kind!
  And feel, thou Earth, for this afflicted Race![7]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  We had a fellow-passenger that came              1803.

  ... who ...                                      1807.

  Driven from the soil of France, a Female came    1827.

The edition of 1838 returns to the text of 1807, but the edition of 1840
reverts to that of 1827.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  ... gaudy ...        1803.

  ... brilliant ...    1827.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  A negro woman, ...    1803.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  Yet silent ...    1803.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  Dejected, downcast, meek, and more than tame:    1803.

  Dejected, meek, yea pitiably tame,               1807.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  But on our proffer'd kindness still did lay    1803.]


[Variant 7:

1845.

  ... or at the same
  Was silent, motionless in eyes and face.
  She was a negro woman, out of France,
  Rejected, like all others of that race:
  Not one of whom may now find footing there.
  What is the meaning of this ordinance?
  Dishonour'd Despots, tell us if ye dare.             1803.

  ... driv'n from France,
  Rejected like all others of that race,
  Not one of whom may now find footing there;
  This the poor Out-cast did to us declare,
  Nor murmur'd at the unfeeling Ordinance.             1807.

  Meanwhile those eyes retained their tropic fire,
  Which, burning independent of the mind,
  Joined with the lustre of her rich attire
  To mock the outcast--O ye Heavens, be kind!
  And feel, thou Earth, for this afflicted Race!       1827.

  Yet still those eyes retained their tropic fire,     1837.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT


[Footnote A: First printed in 'The Morning Post', February 11, 1803,
under the title of 'The Banished Negroes', and signed W. L. D.--Ed.]



It was a natural arrangement which led Wordsworth to place this sonnet,
in his edition of 1807, immediately after the one addressed 'To
Toussaint L'Ouverture'.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





SEPTEMBER, 1802, NEAR DOVER [A]


Composed September, 1802.--Published 1807




  Inland, within a hollow vale, I stood;
  And saw, while sea was calm and air was clear,
  The coast of France--the coast of France how near!
  Drawn almost into frightful neighbourhood.
  I shrunk; for verily the barrier flood                       5
  Was like a lake, or river bright and fair,
  A span of waters; yet what power is there!
  What mightiness for evil and for good! [B]
  Even so doth God protect us if we be
  Virtuous and wise. Winds blow, and waters roll,             10
  Strength to the brave, and Power, and Deity;
  Yet in themselves are nothing! One decree
  Spake laws to _them_, and said that by the soul
  Only, the Nations shall be great and free.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: From 1807 to 1843 the title was 'September, 1802'; "near
Dover" appeared in the "Sonnets" of 1838, but did not become a permanent
part of the title until 1845.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare in S. T. 'Coleridge's Ode to the Departing Year',
stanza vii.:

  'And Ocean 'mid his uproar wild
  Speaks safety to his island-child.'

Ed.]


In 'The Friend' (ed. 1818, vol. i. p. 107), Coleridge writes:

  "The narrow seas that form our boundaries, what were they in times of
  old? The convenient highway for Danish and Norman pirates. What are
  they now? Still, but a 'Span of Waters.' Yet they roll at the base of
  the Ararat, on which the Ark of the Hope of Europe and of Civilization
  rested!"

He then quotes this sonnet from the line "Even so doth God protect us if
we be."

The note appended to the sonnet, 'Composed in the Valley near Dover, on
the day of Landing' (p. 341), shows that this one refers to the same
occasion; and that while "Inland, within a hollow vale," Wordsworth was,
at the same time, on the Dover Cliffs; the "vale" being one of the
hollow clefts in the headland, which front the Dover coast-line. The
sonnet may, however, have been finished afterwards in London.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





WRITTEN IN LONDON, SEPTEMBER, 1802


Composed September, 1802.--Published 1807


[This was written immediately after my return from France to London,
when I could not but be struck, as here described, with the vanity and
parade of our own country, especially in great towns and cities, as
contrasted with the quiet, and I may say the desolation, that the
Revolution had produced in France. This must be borne in mind, or else
the reader may think that in this and the succeeding Sonnets I have
exaggerated the mischief engendered and fostered among us by undisturbed
wealth. It would not be easy to conceive with what a depth of feeling I
entered into the struggle carried on by the Spaniards for their
deliverance from the usurped power of the French. Many times have I gone
from Allan Bank in Grasmere Vale, where we were then residing, to the
top of Raise-gap, as it is called, so late as two o'clock in the
morning, to meet the carrier bringing the newspapers from Keswick.
Imperfect traces of the state of mind in which I then was may be found
in my tract on the Convention of Cintra, as well as in these
Sonnets.--I. F.]




  O FRIEND! [A] I know not which way I must look [1]
  For comfort, being, as I am, opprest,
  To think that now our life is only drest
  For show; mean handy-work of craftsman, cook,
  Or groom!--We must run glittering like a brook                   5
  In the open sunshine, or we are unblest:
  The wealthiest man among us is the best:
  No grandeur now in nature or in book
  Delights us. Rapine, avarice, expense,
  This is idolatry; and these we adore:                           10
  Plain living and high thinking are no more:
  The homely beauty of the good old cause
  Is gone; our peace, our fearful innocence,
  And pure religion breathing household laws. [B]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  O thou proud City! which way shall I look      1838.

The text of 1840 returns to that of 1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The "Friend" was Coleridge. In the original MS. it stands
"Coleridge! I know not," etc. Wordsworth changed it in the proof
stage.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare--in Hartley Coleridge's 'Lives of Distinguished
Northerners'--what is said of this sonnet, in his life of Anne Clifford,
where the passing cynicism of Wordsworth's poem is pointed out.--Ed.]


Wordsworth stayed in London from August 30th to September 22nd 1802.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





LONDON, 1802


Composed September, 1802.--Published 1807




  Milton! thou should'st be living at this hour:
  England hath need of thee: she is a fen
  Of stagnant waters: altar, sword, and pen,
  Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower,
  Have forfeited their ancient English dower                      5
  Of inward happiness. We are selfish men;
  Oh! raise us up, return to us again;
  And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power.
  Thy soul was like a Star, and dwelt apart:
  Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea:               10
  Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free,
  So didst thou travel on life's common way,
  In cheerful godliness; and yet [A] thy heart
  The lowliest duties on herself [1] did lay.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1820.

  ... itself ...       1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In old English "yet" means "continuously" or "always"; and
it is still used in Cumberland with this signification.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"GREAT MEN HAVE BEEN AMONG US; HANDS THAT PENNED"


Composed September, 1802.--Published 1807




  Great men have been among us; hands that penned
  And tongues that uttered wisdom--better none:
  The later Sidney, Marvel, Harrington,
  Young Vane, [A] and others who called Milton friend.
  These moralists could act and comprehend:                       5
  They knew how genuine glory was put on;
  Taught us how rightfully a nation shone
  In splendour: what strength was, that would not bend
  But in [1] magnanimous meekness. France, 'tis strange,
  Hath brought forth no such souls as we had then.               10
  Perpetual emptiness! unceasing change!
  No single volume paramount, no code,
  No master spirit, no determined road;
  But equally a want of books and men!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  But to ...       MS.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion', book iii.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"IT IS NOT TO BE THOUGHT OF THAT THE FLOOD"


Composed September, 1802.--Published 1807 [A]




  It is not to be thought of that the Flood
  Of British freedom, which, to the open sea
  Of the world's praise, from dark antiquity
  Hath flowed, "with pomp of waters, unwithstood,"[B]
  Roused though it be full often to a mood                       5
  Which spurns the check of salutary bands, [1]
  That this most famous Stream in bogs and sands
  Should perish; and to evil and to good
  Be lost for ever. In our halls is hung
  Armoury of the invincible Knights of old:                     10
  We must be [2] free or die, who speak the tongue
  That Shakespeare spake; the faith and morals hold
  Which Milton held.--In every thing we are sprung
  Of Earth's first blood, have titles manifold.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  ... unwithstood,
  Road by which all might come and go that would,
  And bear out freights of worth to foreign lands;    1803.]


[Variant 2:

1807.

  ... must live ...      1803.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: It was first printed in 'The Morning Post', April 16. 1803,
and signed W. L. D.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Daniel's 'Civil War', book ii. stanza 7.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"WHEN I HAVE BORNE IN MEMORY WHAT HAS TAMED"


Composed September, 1802.--Published 1807 [A]




  When I have borne in memory what has tamed
  Great Nations, how ennobling thoughts depart
  When men change swords for ledgers, and desert
  The student's bower for gold, some fears unnamed
  I had, my Country!--am I to be blamed?                         5
  Now, [1] when I think of thee, and what thou art,
  Verily, in the bottom of my heart,
  Of those unfilial fears I am ashamed. [2]
  For dearly must we prize thee; we who find
  In thee a bulwark for the cause of men; [3]                   10
  And I by my affection was beguiled:
  What wonder if a Poet now and then,
  Among the many movements of his mind,
  Felt for thee as a lover or a child!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1.

1845.

  But,...      1803.]


[Variant 2.

1807.

  I of those fears of mine am much ashamed.    1803.]


[Variant 3.

1845.

  But dearly do I prize thee for I find
  In thee a bulwark of the cause of men;         1803.

  But dearly must we prize thee; we who find     1807.

  ... for the cause of men;                      1827.

  Most dearly                                    1838.

The text of 1840 returns to that of 1827.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: But printed previously in 'The Morning Post', September 17,
1803, under the title 'England', and signed W. L. D. Also, see
Coleridge's 'Poems on Political Events', 1828-9.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





COMPOSED AFTER A JOURNEY ACROSS THE HAMBLETON HILLS, [A] YORKSHIRE


Composed October 4, 1802.--Published 1807


[Composed October 4th, 1802, after a journey over the Hambleton Hills,
on a day memorable to me--the day of my marriage. The horizon commanded
by those hills is most magnificent. The next day, while we were
travelling in a post-chaise up Wensleydale, we were stopped by one of
the horses proving restive, and were obliged to wait two hours in a
severe storm before the post-boy could fetch from the inn another to
supply its place. The spot was in front of Bolton Hall, where Mary Queen
of Scots was kept prisoner, soon after her unfortunate landing at
Workington. The place then belonged to the Scroops, and memorials of her
are yet preserved there. To beguile the time I composed a Sonnet. The
subject was our own confinement contrasted with hers; but it was not
thought worthy of being preserved.--I. F.]

One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets."--Ed.




  Dark and more dark the shades of evening fell;
  The wished-for point was reached--but at an hour
  When little could be gained from that rich dower [1]
  Of prospect, whereof many thousands tell.
  Yet did the glowing west with marvellous power                   5
  Salute us; there stood Indian citadel,
  Temple of Greece, and minster with its tower
  Substantially expressed--a place for bell
  Or clock to toll from! Many a tempting isle,
  With groves that never were imagined, lay                       10
  'Mid seas how steadfast! objects all for the eye
  Of silent rapture; but we felt the while [2]
  We should forget them; they are of the sky,
  And from our earthly memory fade away.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  Ere we had reach'd the wish'd-for place, night fell:
  We were too late at least by one dark hour,
  And nothing could we see of all that power
  Of prospect, ...                                    1807.

  Dark, and more dark, the shades of Evening fell;
  The wish'd-for point was reach'd--but late the hour;
  And little could we see of all that power           1815.

  And little could be gained from all that dower      1827.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  The western sky did recompence us well
  With Grecian Temple, Minaret, and Bower;
  And, in one part, a Minster with its Tower
  Substantially distinct, a place for Bell
  Or Clock to toll from. Many a glorious pile
  Did we behold, sights that might well repay
  All disappointment! and, as such, the eye
  Delighted in them; but we felt, the while,         1807.

  Substantially expressed--...                       1815.

  Did we behold, fair sights that might repay        1815.

  Yet did the glowing west in all its power          1827.

The text of 1827 is otherwise identical with that of 1837.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Called by Wordsworth, "The Hamilton Hills" in the editions
from 1807 to 1827.--Ed.]


The following extract from Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal indicates, as
fully as any other passage in it, the use which her brother occasionally
made of it. We have the "Grecian Temple," and the "Minster with its
Tower":

  "Before we had crossed the Hambleton Hill and reached the point
  overlooking Yorkshire it was quite dark. We had not wanted, however,
  fair prospects before us, as we drove along the flat plain of the high
  hill; far, far off from us, in the western sky, we saw shapes of
  castles, ruins among groves--a great, spreading wood, rocks, and
  single trees--a Minster with its Tower unusually distinct, Minarets in
  another quarter, and a round Grecian Temple also; the colours of the
  sky of a bright grey, and the forms of a sober grey, with a dome. As
  we descended the hill there was no distinct view, but of a great
  space, only near us, we saw the wild (and as the people say)
  bottomless Tarn in the hollow at the side of the hill. It seemed to be
  made visible to us only by its own light, for all the hill about us
  was dark."

Wordsworth and his sister crossed over the Hambleton (or Hamilton)
Hills, on their way from Westmoreland to Gallow Hill, Yorkshire, to
visit the Hutchinsons, before they went south to London and Calais,
where they spent the month of August, 1802. But after his marriage to
Mary Hutchinson, on the 4th of October, Wordsworth, his wife, and
sister, recrossed these Hambleton Hills on their way to Grasmere, which
they reached on the evening of the 6th October. The above sonnet was
composed on the evening of the 4th October, as the Fenwick note
indicates.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO H. C.

SIX YEARS OLD


Composed 1802.--Published 1807


One of the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood."--Ed.




  O thou! whose fancies from afar are brought;
  Who of thy words dost make a mock apparel,
  And fittest to unutterable thought
  The breeze-like motion and the self-born carol;
  Thou faery voyager! that dost float                          5
  In such clear water, that thy boat
  May rather seem
  To brood on air [A] than on an earthly stream;
  Suspended in a stream as clear as sky,
  Where earth and heaven do make one imagery;                 10
  O blessed vision! happy child!
  Thou [1] art so exquisitely wild,
  I think of thee with many fears
  For what may be thy lot in future years.

  I thought of times when Pain might be thy guest,            15
  Lord of thy house and hospitality;
  And Grief, uneasy lover! never rest
  But when she sate within the touch of thee.
  O too industrious folly!
  O vain and causeless melancholy!                            20
  Nature will either end thee quite;
  Or, lengthening out thy season of delight,
  Preserve for thee, by individual right,
  A young lamb's heart among the full-grown flocks.
  What hast thou to do with sorrow,                           25
  Or the injuries of to-morrow?
  Thou art a dew-drop, which the morn brings forth,
  Ill fitted to sustain [2] unkindly shocks,
  Or to be trailed along the soiling earth;
  A gem that glitters while it lives,                         30
  And no forewarning gives;
  But, at the touch of wrong, without a strife
  Slips in a moment out of life.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  That ...       1807.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Not doom'd to jostle with ...    1807.

  Not framed to undergo ...        1815.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See Carver's Description of his Situation upon one of the
Lakes of America.--W. W. 1807.]


These stanzas were addressed to Hartley Coleridge. The lines,

  'I think of thee with many fears
  For what may be thy lot in future years,'

taken in connection with his subsequent career, suggest the similarly
sad "presentiment" with which the 'Lines composed above Tintern Abbey'
conclude. The following is the postscript to a letter by his father, S.
T. C., addressed to Sir Humphry Davy, Keswick, July 25, 1800:

  "Hartley is a spirit that dances on an aspen leaf; the air that yonder
  sallow-faced and yawning tourist is breathing, is to my babe a
  perpetual nitrous oxide. Never was more joyous creature born. Pain
  with him is so wholly trans-substantiated by the joys that had rolled
  on before, and rushed on after, that oftentimes five minutes after his
  mother has whipt him he has gone up and asked her to whip him again."

('Fragmentary Remains, Literary and Scientific', of Sir Humphry Davy,
Bart., pp. 78, 79.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE DAISY


Composed 1802.--Published 1807




  "Her [A] divine skill taught me this,
  That from every thing I saw
  I could some instruction draw,
  And raise pleasure to the height
  Through the meanest object's sight.
  By the murmur of a spring,
  Or the least bough's rustelling;
  By a Daisy whose leaves spread
  Shut when Titan goes to bed;
  Or a shady bush or tree;
  She could more infuse in me
  Than all Nature's beauties can
  In some other wiser man."

G. WITHER. [1]


[Composed in the orchard, Town-end, Grasmere.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  In youth from rock to rock I went,
  From hill to hill in discontent
  Of pleasure high and turbulent,
      Most pleased when most uneasy;
  But now my own delights I make,--5
  My thirst at every rill can slake, [2]
  And gladly Nature's love partake,
      Of Thee, sweet Daisy! [3]

  Thee Winter in the garland wears
  That thinly decks his few grey hairs;                    10
  Spring parts the clouds with softest airs,
    That she may sun thee; [4]
  Whole Summer-fields are thine by right;
  And Autumn, melancholy Wight!
  Doth in thy crimson head delight                         15
    When rains are on thee.

  In shoals and bands, a morrice train,
  Thou greet'st the traveller in the lane;
  Pleased at his greeting thee again;
    Yet nothing daunted,                                   20
  Nor grieved if thou be set at nought: [5]
  And oft alone in nooks remote
  We meet thee, like a pleasant thought,
    When such are wanted.

  Be violets in their secret mews                          25
  The flowers the wanton Zephyrs choose;
  Proud be the rose, with rains and dews
    Her head impearling,
  Thou liv'st with less ambitious aim,
  Yet hast not gone without thy fame;                      30
  Thou art indeed by many a claim
      The Poet's darling.

  If to a rock from rains he fly,
  Or, some bright day of April sky,
  Imprisoned by hot sunshine lie                           35
      Near the green holly,
  And wearily at length should fare;
  He needs [6] but look about, and there
  Thou art!--a friend at hand, to scare
      His melancholy.                                      40

  A hundred times, by rock or bower,
  Ere thus I have lain couched an hour,
  Have I derived from thy sweet power
      Some apprehension;
  Some steady love; some brief delight; [7]                45
  Some memory that had taken flight;
  Some chime [8] of fancy wrong or right;
      Or stray invention.

  If stately passions in me burn,
  And one [9] chance look to Thee should turn,             50
  I drink out of an humbler urn
      A lowlier pleasure;
  The homely sympathy that heeds
  The common life, our nature breeds;
  A wisdom fitted to the needs                             55
      Of hearts at leisure.

  Fresh-smitten by the morning ray,
  When thou art up, alert and gay,
  Then, cheerful Flower! my spirits play
      With kindred gladness: [10]                          60
  And when, at dusk, by dews opprest
  Thou sink'st, the image of thy rest
  Hath often eased my pensive breast
      Of careful sadness. [11]

  And all day long I number yet,                           65
  All seasons through, another debt,
  Which I, wherever thou art met,
      To thee am owing; [12]
   An instinct call it, a blind sense;
  A happy, genial influence,                               70
  Coming one knows not how, nor whence,
      Nor whither going.

  Child of the Year! that round dost run
  Thy pleasant course,--when day's begun
  As ready to salute the sun                               75
      As lark or leveret,
  Thy long-lost praise thou shalt regain; [B]
  Nor be less dear to future men
  Than in old time;--thou not in vain [13]
      Art Nature's favourite. [C]                          80


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1: The extract from Wither was first prefixed to this poem in
the edition of 1815. The late Mr. Dykes Campbell was of opinion that
Charles Lamb had suggested this motto to Wordsworth, as 'The Shepherd's
Hunting' was Lamb's "prime favourite" amongst Wither's poems. It may be
as well to note that his quotation was erroneous in two places. His
"instruction" should be "invention" (l. 3), and his "the" (in l. 4)
should be "her."--Ed.]


[Variant 2:

1807.

  To gentle sympathies awake,     MS.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  And Nature's love of Thee partake,
    Her much-loved Daisy!     1836.

The text of 1840 returns to the reading of 1807.

    Of her sweet Daisy.          C.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  When soothed a while by milder airs,
  Thee Winter in the garland wears
  That thinly shades his few grey hairs;
    Spring cannot shun thee;        1807.

  When Winter decks his few grey hairs
  Thee in the scanty wreath he wears;
  Spring parts the clouds with softest airs,
    That she may sun thee;          1827.]


[Variant 5:

1836.

  ... in the lane;
  If welcome once thou count'st it gain;
    Thou art not daunted,
  Nor car'st if thou be set at naught;        1807.

  If welcom'd ...                             1815.

The text of 1827 returns to that of 1807.]


[Variant 6:

1820

  He need.....       1807]


[Variant 7:

1807

  ....some chance delight;     MS.]


[Variant 8:

1807

  Some charm.....        C.]


[Variant 9:

1807

  And some.....          MS.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  When, smitten by the morning ray,
  I see thee rise alert and gay,
  Then, chearful Flower! my spirits play
      With kindred motion:                 1807.

      With kindred gladness:               1815.

  Then Daisy! do my spirits play,
      With cheerful motion.                  MS.]


[Variant 11:

1815.

  At dusk, I've seldom mark'd thee press
  The ground, as if in thankfulness
  Without some feeling, more or less,
      Of true devotion.                  1807.

  The ground in modest thankfulness        MS.]


[Variant 12:

1807.

  But more than all I number yet
  O bounteous Flower! another debt
  Which I to thee wherever met
      Am daily owing;                    MS.]


[Variant 13:

1836.

  Child of the Year! that round dost run
  Thy course, bold lover of the sun,
  And chearful when the day's begun
      As morning Leveret,
  Thou long the Poet's praise shalt gain;
  Thou wilt be more belov'd by men
  In times to come; thou not in vain         1807.

  Thy long-lost praise thou shalt regain;
  Dear shalt thou be to future men
  As in old time;--1815.

  Dear thou shalt be                         1820.

The text of 1827 returns to that of 1815.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: His Muse.--W. W. 1815.

The extract is from 'The Shepherds Hunting', eclogue fourth, ll.
368-80.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: See, in Chaucer and the elder Poets, the honours formerly
paid to this flower.--W. W. 1815.]


[Footnote C: This Poem, and two others to the same Flower, which the
Reader will find in the second Volume, were written in the year 1802;
which is mentioned, because in some of the ideas, though not in the
manner in which those ideas are connected, and likewise even in some of
the expressions, they bear a striking resemblance to a Poem (lately
published) of Mr. Montgomery, entitled, 'A Field Flower'. This being
said, Mr. Montgomery will not think any apology due to him; I cannot
however help addressing him in the words of the Father of English Poets:

  'Though it happe me to rehersin--
  That ye han in your freshe songis saied,
  Forberith me, and beth not ill apaied,
  Sith that ye se I doe it in the honour
  Of Love, and eke in service of the Flour.'

W. W. 1807.

In the edition of 1836, the following variation of the text of this note
occurs: "There is a resemblance to passages in a Poem."--Ed.]



For illustration of the last stanza, see Chaucer's Prologue to 'The
Legend of Good Women'.

  'As I seyde erst, whanne comen is the May,
  That in my bed ther daweth me no day,
  That I nam uppe and walkyng in the mede,
  To seen this floure agein the sonne sprede,
  Whan it up rysith erly by the morwe;
  That blisful sight softneth al my sorwe,
  So glad am I, whan that I have presence
  Of it, to doon it alle reverence,
  As she that is of alle floures flour.'
  ...
  To seen this flour so yong, so fresshe of hewe,
  Constreynde me with so gredy desire,
  That in myn herte I feele yet the fire,
  That made me to ryse er yt wer day,
  And this was now the firste morwe of May,
  With dredful hert, and glad devocioun
  For to ben at the resurreccion
  Of this flour, whan that yt shulde unclose
  Agayne the sonne, that roos as rede as rose
  ...
  And doune on knes anoon ryght I me sette,
  And as I koude, this fresshe flour I grette,
  Knelying alwey, til it unclosed was,
  Upon the smale, softe, swote gras.

Again, in The 'Cuckoo and the Nightingale', after a wakeful night, the
Poet rises at dawn, and wandering forth, reaches a "laund of white and
green."

  'So feire oon had I nevere in bene,
  The grounde was grene, y poudred with dayse,
  The floures and the gras ilike al hie,
  Al grene and white, was nothing elles sene.'


Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE SAME FLOWER [A]


Composed 1802.--Published 1807


[Composed in the orchard, Town-end, Grasmere.-I. F.]

One of the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  With little here to do or see
  Of things that in the great world be,
  Daisy! again I talk to thee, [1]
      For thou art worthy,
  Thou unassuming Common-place                              5
  Of Nature, with that homely face,
  And yet with something of a grace,
    Which Love makes for thee!

  Oft on the dappled turf at ease
  I sit, and play with similes, [2]                        10
  Loose types of things through all degrees,
    Thoughts of thy raising:
  And many a fond and idle name
  I give to thee, for praise or blame,
  As is the humour of the game,                            15
    While I am gazing.

  A nun demure of lowly port;
  Or sprightly maiden, of Love's court,
  In thy simplicity the sport
    Of all temptations;                                    20
  A queen in crown of rubies drest;
  A starveling in a scanty vest;
  Are all, as seems [3] to suit thee best,
    Thy appellations.

  A little cyclops, with one eye                           25
  Staring to threaten and defy,
  That thought comes next--and instantly
    The freak is over,
  The shape will vanish--and behold
  A silver shield with boss of gold,                       30
  That spreads itself, some faery bold
    In fight to cover!

  I see thee glittering from afar--
  And then thou art a pretty star;
  Not quite so fair as many are                            35
    In heaven above thee!
  Yet like a star, with glittering crest,
  Self-poised in air thou seem'st to rest;--
  May peace come never to his nest,
  Who shall reprove thee!                                  40

  Bright _Flower!_ [4] for by that name at last,
  When all my reveries are past,
  I call thee, and to that cleave fast,
  Sweet silent creature!
  That breath'st with me in sun and air,                   45
  Do thou, as thou art wont, repair
  My heart with gladness, and a share
  Of thy meek nature!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  Sweet Daisy! oft I talk to thee,    1807.

  Yet once again I talk . .           1836.]


[Variant 2:

1820.

  Oft do I sit by thee at ease,
  And weave a web of similies,        1807.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  ... seem ...        1807.]


[Variant 4:

1836.

  Sweet Flower!....         1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The two following Poems were overflowings of the mind in
composing the one which stands first in the first Volume (i.e. the
previous Poem),--W. W. 1807.]



In his editions 1836-1849 Wordsworth gave 1805 as the year in which this
poem was composed, but the Fenwick note prefixed to it renders this
impossible. It evidently belongs to the same time, and "mood," as the
previous poem.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE DAISY (#2)


Composed 1802.--Published 1807


[This and the other Poems addressed to the same flower were composed at
Town-end, Grasmere, during the earlier part of my residence there. I
have been censured for the last line but one--"thy function
apostolical"--as being little less than profane. How could it be thought
so? The word is adopted with reference to its derivation, implying
something sent on a mission; and assuredly this little flower,
especially when the subject of verse, may be regarded, in its humble
degree, as administering both to moral and to spiritual purposes.--I.F.]

This was included among the "Poems of the Fancy" from 1815 to 1832. In
1837 it was transferred to the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.




  Bright Flower! whose home is everywhere,
  Bold in maternal Nature's care,
  And all the long year through the heir [1]
  Of joy and [2] sorrow.
  Methinks that there abides in thee                           5
  Some concord [3] with humanity,
  Given to no other flower I see
  The forest thorough!

  Is it that Man is soon deprest? [4]
  A thoughtless Thing! who, once unblest,                     10
  Does little on his memory rest,
  Or on his reason,
  And [5] Thou would'st teach him how to find
  A shelter under every wind,
  A hope for times that are unkind                            15
  And every season?

  Thou wander'st the wide world about,
  Uncheck'd by pride or scrupulous doubt,
  With friends to greet thee, or without,
  Yet pleased and willing;                                    20
  Meek, yielding to the occasion's call,
  And all things suffering from all,
  Thy function apostolical
    In peace fulfilling. [6]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1840.

  Bright Flower, whose home is every where!
  A Pilgrim bold in Nature's care,
  And all the long year through the heir        1807.

  Bright flower, whose home is every where!
  A Pilgrim bold in Nature's care,
  And oft, the long year through, the heir      1827.

  Confiding Flower, by Nature's care
  Made bold,--who, lodging here or there,
  Art all the long year through the heir        1837.]


[Variant 2:

1850.

  ... or ...                                    1807.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  Communion ...                                 1837.

The text of 1840 returns to that of 1807.]


[Variant 4:

1807.

  And wherefore? Man is soon deprest;           1827.

The text of 1837 returns to that of 1807.]


[Variant 5:

1807.

  But ...                                       1827.

The text of 1837 returns to that of 1807.]


[Variant 6:

1807.

This stanza was omitted in the editions of 1827 and 1832, but replaced
in 1837.]


The three preceding poems 'To the Daisy' evidently belong to the same
time, and are, as Wordsworth expressly says, "overflowings of the mind
in composing the one which stands first." Nevertheless, in the revised
edition of 1836-7, he gave the date 1802 to the first, 1803 to the
third, and 1805 to the second of them. In the earlier editions 1815 to
1832, they are all classed among the "Poems of the Fancy," but in the
edition of 1837, and afterwards, the last, "Bright Flower! whose home is
everywhere," is ranked among the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."
They should manifestly be placed together. Wordsworth's fourth poem 'To
the Daisy', which is an elegy on his brother John, and belongs to a
subsequent year--having no connection with the three preceding poems,
will be found in its chronological place.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





LOUISA

AFTER ACCOMPANYING HER ON A MOUNTAIN EXCURSION


Composed 1802.--Published 1807


[Town-end 1805.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems founded on the Affections." From 1807 to 1832 the
title was simply 'Louisa'.--Ed.




  I met Louisa in the shade,
  And, having seen that lovely Maid,
  Why should I fear to say [1]
  That, nymph-like, she is fleet and strong, [2]
  And down the rocks can leap along                             5
  Like rivulets in May?
  [3]
  She loves her fire, her cottage-home;
  Yet o'er the moorland will she roam
  In weather rough and bleak;
  And, when against the wind she strains,                      10
  Oh! might I kiss the mountain rains
  That sparkle on her cheek.

  Take all that's mine "beneath the moon," [A]
  If I with her but half a noon
  May sit beneath the walls                                    15
  Of some old cave, or mossy nook,
  When up she winds along the brook [4]
  To hunt the waterfalls.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  Though, by a sickly taste betrayed,
  Some will dispraise the lovely Maid,
  With fearless pride I say       1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1807.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  That she is ruddy, fleet, and strong;       1807.

  That she is healthful, ...                  1836.]


[Variant 3: In the editions of 1807 to 1843 occurs the following verse,
which was omitted from subsequent editions:

  And she hath smiles to earth unknown;
  Smiles, that with motion of their own
  Do spread, and sink, and rise;
  That come and go with endless play,
  And ever, as they pass away,
  Are hidden in her eyes.]


[Variant 4:

1807.

  When she goes barefoot up the brook      MS.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Young's 'Night Thoughts', where the phrase occurs
three times. See also 'Lear', act IV. scene vi. l. 26:

  'For all beneath the moon.'

Haywood, 'The English Traveller', v. 1:

  'All things that dwell beneath the moon.'

It was also used by William Drummond, in one of his sonnets,

  'I know that all beneath the moon decays.'

Ed.]



Wordsworth gave as the date of the composition of this poem the year
1805; but he said of the following one, 'To a Young Lady, who had been
Reproached for taking Long Walks in the Country'--"composed at the same
time" and "designed to make one piece"--that it was written in 1803.

But it is certain that these following lines appeared in 'The Morning
Post', on Feb. 12, 1802, where they are headed 'To a beautiful Young
Lady, who had been harshly spoken of on account of her fondness for
taking long walks in the Country'. There is difficulty, both in
ascertaining the exact date of composition, and in knowing who "Louisa"
or the "Young Lady" was. Mrs. Millicent G. Fawcett wrote to me several
years ago, suggesting, with some plausibility, a much earlier date, if
Dorothy Wordsworth was the lady referred to. She referred me to
Dorothy's letter to her aunt, Mrs. Crackenthorpe, written from
Windybrow, Keswick, in 1794, when staying there with her brother; and
says

  "What inclined me to think that the poem was written earlier than 1805
  was that it anticipates Dorothy's marriage, and this would more
  naturally be present as a probable event in W. W.'s mind in 1794 or
  thereabouts than in 1805, after Dorothy had dedicated her life to her
  brother, to the exclusion of all wish to make a home of her own by
  marriage. The expression 'Healthy as a shepherd boy' is also more
  applicable to a girl of twenty-two than to a woman of thirty-three. Do
  you think it possible that the poem may have been written in 1794, and
  not published till later, when its application would be less evident
  to the family circle?"

Dorothy Wordsworth's letter will be quoted in full in a later volume,
but the following extract from it may be given now:

  "I cannot pass unnoticed that part of your letter in which you speak
  of my 'rambling about the country on foot.' So far from considering
  this as a matter for condemnation I rather thought it would have given
  my friends pleasure that I had courage to make use of the strength
  with which Nature has endowed me, when it not only procured me
  infinitely more pleasure than I should have received from sitting in a
  post-chaise, but was also the means of saving me at least thirty
  shillings."

I do not think the date of composition can be so early as 1794. What may
be called internal, or structural, evidence is against it. Wordsworth
never could have written these two poems till after his settlement at
Dove Cottage. Besides, in 1794, he could have no knowledge of a possible
"nest in a green dale, a harbour and a hold"; while at that time his
sister had certainly no "cottage home." I believe they were written
after he took up his residence at Town-end (the date being uncertain);
and that they refer to his sister, and not to his wife. It has been
suggested by Mr. Ernest Coleridge (see 'The Athenaeum', Oct. 21, 1893)
that they refer to Mary Hutchinson: but there is no evidence of
Wordsworth taking long country walks with her before their marriage, or
that she was "nymph-like," "fleet and strong," that she loved to "roam
the moorland," "in weather rough and bleak," or that she "hunted
waterfalls." The reference to his sister is confirmed by the omission of
the delightful second stanza of the poem in the last edition revised by
the poet, that of 1849, when she was a confirmed invalid at Rydal Mount.
Those "smiles to earth unknown," had then ceased for ever. The reason
why Wordsworth erased so delightful and wonderful a stanza, is to me
only explicable on the supposition, that it was his sister he referred
to, she who had accompanied him in former days, in so many of his "long
walks in the country." His wife never did this; she had not the physical
strength to do it; and, if she had been the person referred to,
Wordsworth would hardly, in 1845, have erased such a description of her,
as occurs in the stanza written in 1802, when she was still so vigorous.
Besides, Mary Wordsworth was in no sense "a Child of Nature," as Dorothy
was: while the testimony of the Wordsworth household is explicit, that
it was to his sister, and not to his wife, that the poet referred. I
find no difficulty in the allusion made in the second poem to Dorothy
being yet possibly a "Wife and Friend"; nor to the fact that it was
originally addressed "To a beautiful Young Lady." Neither Dorothy nor
Mary Wordsworth were physically "beautiful," according to our highest
standards; although the poet addressed the latter as "a Phantom of
delight," and as "a lovely apparition." It is quite true that it was
Mary Wordsworth's old age that was "serene and bright," while Dorothy's
was the very reverse; but the poet's anticipation of the future was
written when his sister was young, and was by far the stronger of the
two.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO A YOUNG LADY, WHO HAD BEEN REPROACHED FOR TAKING LONG WALKS IN THE
COUNTRY [A]


Composed 1802.--Published 1807


[Composed at the same time and on the same view as "I met Louisa in the
shade:" indeed they were designed to make one piece.--I.F.]

From 1815 to 1832 this was classed among the "Poems proceeding from
Sentiment and Reflection." In 1836 it was transferred to the group of
"Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  Dear Child of Nature, let them rail!
--There is a nest in a green dale,
  A harbour and a hold;
  Where thou, a Wife and Friend, shalt see
  Thy own heart-stirring days, [1] and be                       5
  A light to young and old.

  There, healthy as a shepherd boy,
  And treading among flowers of joy
  Which at no season fade, [2]
  Thou, while thy babes around thee cling,                     10
  Shalt show us how divine a thing
  A Woman may be made.

  Thy thoughts and feelings shall not die,
  Nor leave thee, when grey hairs are nigh
  A melancholy slave;                                          15
  But an old age serene [3] and bright,
  And lovely as a Lapland night,
  Shall lead thee to thy grave.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  Thy own delightful days, ...      1802.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  As if thy heritage were joy,
  And pleasure were thy trade.       1802.

  And treading among flowers of joy,
  That at no season fade,            1827.]


[Variant 3:

1815.

  ... alive ...      1802.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: For the original title of this poem,--as published in 'The
Morning Post and Gazetteer',--see the note to the previous poem. When
first published it was unsigned.--Ed.]


See the editorial note to the preceding poem.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





1803


The poems associated with the year 1803 consist mainly of the "Memorials
of a Tour in Scotland," which Wordsworth and his sister took--along with
Coleridge--in the autumn of that year, although many of these were not
written till some time after the Tour was finished. 'The Green Linnet'
and 'Yew-trees' were written in 1803, and some sonnets were composed in
the month of October; but, on the whole, 1803 was not a fruitful year in
Wordsworth's life, as regards his lyrics and smaller poems. Doubtless
both 'The Prelude' and 'The Excursion' were revised in 1803.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE GREEN LINNET


Composed 1803.--Published 1807


[Composed in the orchard, Town-end, Grasmere, where the bird was often
seen as here described.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




  Beneath these fruit-tree boughs that shed
  Their snow white blossoms on my head,
  With brightest sunshine round me spread
    Of spring's unclouded weather,
  In this sequestered nook how sweet                          5
  To sit upon my orchard-seat!
  And birds and flowers once more to greet,
    My last year's friends together. [1]

  One have I marked, the happiest guest
  In all this covert of the blest:                           10
  Hail to Thee, far above the rest
    In joy of voice and pinion!
  Thou, Linnet! in thy green array,
  Presiding Spirit here to-day,
  Dost lead the revels of the May;                           15
    And this is thy dominion.

  While birds, and butterflies, and flowers,
  Make all one band of paramours,
  Thou, ranging up and down the bowers,
    Art sole in thy employment:                              20
  A Life, a Presence like the Air,
  Scattering thy gladness without care,
  Too blest with any one to pair;
    Thyself thy own enjoyment.

  Amid [2] yon tuft of hazel trees,                          25
  That twinkle to the gusty breeze,
  Behold him perched in ecstacies,
    Yet seeming still to hover;
  There! where the flutter of his wings
  Upon his back and body flings                              30
  Shadows and sunny glimmerings,
    That cover him all over.

  My dazzled sight he oft deceives,
  A Brother of the dancing leaves;
  Then flits, and from the cottage-eaves                     35
    Pours forth his song in gushes; [3]
  As if by that exulting strain
  He mocked and treated with disdain
  The voiceless Form he chose to feign,
    While fluttering in the bushes. [4]                      40


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  The May is come again:--how sweet
  To sit upon my Orchard-seat!
  And Birds and Flowers once more to greet,
    My last year's Friends together:
  My thoughts they all by turns employ;
  A whispering Leaf is now my joy,
  And then a Bird will be the toy
    That doth my fancy tether.                   1807.

  And Flowers and Birds once more to greet,      1815.

The text of 1815 is otherwise identical with that of 1827.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  Upon ...      1807.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  While thus before my eyes he gleams,
  A Brother of the Leaves he seems;
  When in a moment forth he teems
  His little song in gushes:               1807.

  My sight he dazzles, half deceives,
  A Bird so like the dancing Leaves;
  Then flits, and from the Cottage eaves
    Pours forth his song in gushes;        1827.

  My dazzled sight the Bird deceives,
  A Brother of the dancing Leaves;         1832.

  The Bird my dazzled sight deceives,      1840.

  The Bird my dazzling sight deceives      C.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  As if it pleas'd him to disdain
  And mock the Form which he did feign,
  While he was dancing with the train
    Of Leaves among the bushes.              1807.

  The voiceless Form he chose to feign,      1820.]


Of all Wordsworth's poems this is the one most distinctively associated
with the Orchard, at Town-end, Grasmere. Dorothy Wordsworth writes in
her Journal under date May 28th, 1802:

  "We sat in the orchard. The young bull-finches in their pretty
  coloured raiment, bustle about among the blossoms, and poise
  themselves like wire-dancers or tumblers, shaking the twigs and
  dashing off the blossoms."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





YEW-TREES


Composed 1803.--Published 1815


[Written at Grasmere. These Yew-trees are still standing, but the spread
of that at Lorton is much diminished by mutilation. I will here mention
that a little way up the hill, on the road leading from Rosthwaite to
Stonethwaite (in Borrowdale) lay the trunk of a Yew-tree, which appeared
as you approached, so vast was its diameter, like the entrance of a
cave, and not a small one. Calculating upon what I have observed of the
slow growth of this tree in rocky situations, and of its durability, I
have often thought that the one I am describing must have been as old as
the Christian era. The Tree lay in the line of a fence. Great masses of
its ruins were strewn about, and some had been rolled down the hillside
and lay near the road at the bottom. As you approached the tree, you
were struck with the number of shrubs and young plants, ashes, etc.,
which had found a bed upon the decayed trunk and grew to no
inconsiderable height, forming, as it were, a part of the hedgerow. In
no part of England, or of Europe, have I ever seen a yew-tree at all
approaching this in magnitude, as it must have stood. By the bye,
Hutton, the old guide, of Keswick, had been so impressed with the
remains of this tree, that he used gravely to tell strangers that there
could be no doubt of its having been in existence before the
flood.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  There is a Yew-tree, pride of Lorton Vale,
  Which to this day stands single, in the midst
  Of its own darkness, as it stood of yore:
  Not loth to furnish weapons for the bands
  Of Umfraville or Percy ere they marched                          5
  To Scotland's heaths; or those that crossed the sea
  And drew their sounding bows at Azincour,
  Perhaps at earlier Crecy, or Poictiers.
  Of vast circumference and gloom profound
  This solitary Tree! a living thing                              10
  Produced too slowly ever to decay;
  Of form and aspect too magnificent
  To be destroyed. But worthier still of note
  Are those fraternal Four of Borrowdale,
  Joined in one solemn and capacious grove;                       15
  Huge trunks! and each particular trunk a growth
  Of intertwisted fibres serpentine
  Up-coiling, and inveterately convolved;
  Nor uninformed with Phantasy, and looks
  That threaten the profane;--a pillared shade,                   20
  Upon whose grassless floor of red-brown hue,
  By sheddings from the pining umbrage tinged
  Perennially--beneath whose sable roof
  Of boughs, as if for festal purpose, decked
  With unrejoicing berries--ghostly Shapes                        25
  May meet at noontide; Fear and trembling Hope,
  Silence and Foresight; Death the Skeleton
  And Time the Shadow;--there to celebrate,
  As in a natural temple scattered o'er
  With altars undisturbed of mossy stone,                         30
  United worship; or in mute repose
  To lie, and listen to the mountain flood
  Murmuring from Glaramara's inmost caves.



The text of this poem was never altered. The Lorton Yew-tree--which, in
1803, was "of vast circumference," the "pride of Lorton Vale," and
described as:

    'a living thing
  Produced too slowly ever to decay;
  Of form and aspect too magnificent
  To be destroyed--'

does not now verify its poet's prediction of the future. Mr. Wilson
Robinson of Whinfell Hall, Cockermouth, wrote to me of it in May 1880:

  "The tree in outline expanded towards the root considerably: then, at
  about two feet from the ground, the trunk began to separate into huge
  limbs, spreading in all directions. I once measured this trunk at its
  least circumference, and found it 23 feet 10 inches. For the last 50
  or 60 years the branches have been gradually dying on the S. E. side,
  and about 25 years ago a strong S. E. gale, coming with accumulated
  force down Hope Gill, and--owing to the tree being so open on that
  side--taking it laterally at a disadvantage, wrenched off one of the
  great side branches down to the ground, carrying away nearly a third
  of the tree. This event led to farther peril; for, the second portion
  having been sold to a cabinetmaker at Whitehaven for ?15, this gave
  the impression that the wood was very valuable (owing to the celebrity
  of the tree); and a local woodmonger bought the remainder. Two men
  worked half a day to grub it up; but a Cockermouth medical gentleman,
  hearing what was going on, made representations to the owner, and it
  ended in the woodmen sparing the remainder of the tree, which was not
  much the worse for what had been done. Many large dead branches have
  also been cut off, and now we have to regret that the 'pride of Lorton
  Vale,' shorn of its ancient dignity, is but a ruin, much more
  venerable than picturesque."

The "fraternal Four of Borrowdale" are certainly "worthier still of
note." The "trunk" described in the Fenwick note, as on the road between
Rosthwaite and Stonethwaite, has disappeared long ago; but the "solemn
and capacious grove" existed till 1883 in its integrity. The description
in the poem is realistic throughout, while the visible scene suggests

  "an ideal grove, in which the ghostly masters of mankind meet, and
  sleep, and offer worship to the Destiny that abides above them, while
  the mountain flood, as if from another world, makes music to which
  they dimly listen."

(Stopford A. Brooke, in 'Theology in the English Poets', p. 259.) With
the first part of the poem Wordsworth's 'Sonnet composed at----Castle'
during the Scotch Tour of 1803 may be compared (p. 410). For a critical
estimate of the poem see 'Modern Painters', part III. sec. II, chap. iv.
Ruskin alludes to "the real and high action of the imagination in
Wordsworth's 'Yew-trees' (perhaps the most vigorous and solemn bit of
forest landscape ever painted). It is too long to quote, but the reader
should refer to it: let him note especially, if painter, that pure touch
of colour, 'by sheddings from the pining umbrage tinged.'" See also
Coleridge's criticism in 'Biographia Literaria', vol. ii. p. 177,
edition 1847, and his daughter Sara's comment on her father's note.
There can be little doubt that, as Professor Dowden has suggested, the
lines 23 to 28 were suggested to Wordsworth by Virgil's lines in the
Sixth Book of the 'AEneid', 273-284--

  'Vestibulum ante ipsum primisque in faucibus Orci
  Luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae;
  Pallentesque habitant Morbi, tristisque Senectus,
  Et Metus, et malesuada Fames, ac turpis Egestas,
  Terribiles visu formae, Letumque, Labosque;
  Tum consanguineus Leti Sopor, et mala mentis
  Gaudia, mortiferumque adverso in limine Bellum,
  Ferreique Eumenidum thalami, et Discordia demens,
  Vipereum crinem vittis innexa cruentis.
    In medio ramos annosaque bracchia pandit
  Ulmus opaca, ingens, quam sedem Somnia volgo
  Vana tenere ferunt, foliisque sub omnibus haerent.'


  "The 'Four Yew Trees,' and the mysterious company which you have
  assembled there, 'Death the Skeleton and Time the Shadow.' It is a
  sight not for every youthful poet to dream of; it is one of the last
  results he must have gone thinking for years for."

(Charles Lamb to Wordsworth, 1815.)

In Crabb Robinson's 'Diary', a reference to the Yew-trees of Lorton and
Borrowdale will be found under date Sept. 16 and 20, 1816.

  "The pride of Lorton Vale" is now a ruin, and has lost all its ancient
  majesty: but, until the close of 1883, the "fraternal four" of
  Borrowdale were still to be seen "in grand assemblage." Every one who
  has felt the power of Wordsworth's poetry,--and especially those who
  had visited the Seathwaite valley, and read the 'Yew-Trees' under the
  shade of that once "solemn and capacious grove" before 1884,--must
  have felt as if they had lost a personal friend, when they heard that
  the "grove" was gone. The great gale of December 11, 1883, smote it
  fiercely, uprooting one of the trees, and blowing the others to
  ribbands. The following is Mr. Rawnsley's account of the disaster:

    'Last week the gale that ravaged England did the Lake country much
    harm. We could spare many of the larch plantations, and could hear
    (with a sigh) of the fall of the giant Scotch firs opposite the
    little Scafell Inn at Rosthwaite, and that Watendlath had lost its
    pines; but who could spare those ancient Yews, the great

      "... fraternal Four of Borrowdale,
      Joined in one solemn and capacious grove;
      Huge trunks! and each particular trunk a growth
      Of intertwisted fibres serpentine
      Up-coiling, and inveterately convolved."

    'For beneath their pillared shade since Wordsworth wrote his poem,
    that Yew-tree grove has suggested to many a wanderer up Borrowdale,
    and visitant to the Natural Temple,

      "an ideal grove in which the ghostly masters of mankind meet, and
      sleep, and offer worship to the Destiny that abides above them,
      while the mountain flood, as if from another world, makes music to
      which they dimly listen."

    'These Yew-trees, seemingly

      "Produced too slowly ever to decay;
      Of form and aspect too magnificent
      To be destroyed,"

    'have been ruthlessly overthrown. One has been uprooted bodily; all
    the leaders and branches of the others have been wrenched from the
    main trunk; and the three still standing are bare poles and broken
    wreckage. Until one visits the spot one can have no conception of
    the wholesale destruction that the hurricane has wrought; until he
    looks on the huge rosy-hearted branches he cannot guess the
    tremendous force with which the tornado had fallen upon that "sable
    roof of boughs."

    'For tornado or whirlwind it must needs have been. The Yews grew
    under the eastern flank of the hill called Base Brown. The gale
    raged from the westward. One could hardly believe it possible that
    the trees could have been touched by it; for the barrier hill on
    which they grew,--and under whose shelter they have seen centuries
    of storm,--goes straight upwards, betwixt them and the west. It was
    only realizable when, standing amid the wreckage, and looking across
    the valley, it was seen that a larch plantation had been entirely
    levelled, and evidently by a wind that was coming from the east, and
    directly toward the Yew-trees. On enquiring at Seathwaite Farm, one
    found that all the slates blown from the roof of that building on
    the west side, had been whirled up clean over the roof: and we can
    only surmise that the winds rushing from the west and north-west,
    and meeting the bastions of Glaramara and the Sty-head slopes, were
    whirled round in the 'cul-de-sac' of the valley, and moved with
    churning motion back from east to west over the Seathwaite Farm, and
    so in straight line across the beck, and up the slope to the
    Yew-tree cluster. With what a wrenching, and with what violence,
    these trees were in a moment shattered, only those can guess who now
    witness the ruins of the pillared shade, upon the "grassless floor
    of red-brown hue."'"

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"WHO FANCIED WHAT A PRETTY SIGHT"


Composed 1803.--Published 1807


In the edition of 1807 this poem was No. VIII. of the series entitled
"Moods of my own Mind." It was afterwards included among the "Poems of
the Fancy," and in a MS. copy it was named "The Coronet of
Snowdrops."--Ed.




  Who fancied what a pretty sight
  This Rock would be if edged around
  With living snow-drops? circlet bright!
  How glorious to this orchard-ground!
  Who loved the little Rock, and set                    5
  Upon its head this coronet?

  Was it the humour of a child?
  Or rather of some gentle [1] maid,
  Whose brows, the day that she was styled
  The shepherd-queen, were thus arrayed?               10
  Of man mature, or matron sage?
  Or old man toying with his age?

  I asked--'twas whispered; The device
  To each and [2] all might well belong:
  It is the Spirit of Paradise                         15
  That prompts such work, a Spirit strong,
  That gives to all the self-same bent
  Where life is wise and innocent.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... love-sick ...       1807.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  ... or ...       1807.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"IT IS NO SPIRIT WHO FROM HEAVEN HATH FLOWN"


Composed 1803.--Published 1807


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. I remember the instant my sister S. H.,
called me to the window of our Cottage, saying, "Look how beautiful is
yon star! It has the sky all to itself." I composed the verses
immediately.--I.F.]

This was No. XIII. of "Moods of my own Mind," in the edition of 1807. It
was afterwards included among the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  It is no Spirit who from heaven hath flown,
  And is descending on his embassy;
  Nor Traveller gone from earth the heavens to espy!
  'Tis Hesperus--there he stands with glittering crown,
  First admonition that the sun is down!                        5
  For yet it is broad day-light: clouds pass by;
  A few are near him still--and now the sky,
  He hath it to himself--'tis all his own.
  O most ambitious Star! an inquest wrought
  Within me when I recognised thy light;                       10
  A moment I was startled at the sight:
  And, while I gazed, there came to me a thought
  That I might step beyond my natural race
  As thou seem'st now to do; might one day trace [1]
  Some ground not mine; and, strong her strength above,        15
  My Soul, an Apparition in the place,
  Tread there with steps that no one shall reprove! [A]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1: 1807.

  O most ambitious Star! an inquest wrought
  Within me when I recognised thy light;
  A moment I was startled at the sight:
  And, while I gazed, there came to me a thought
  That even I beyond my natural race
  Might step as thou dost now: might one day trace    1815.

  O most ambitious Star! thy Presence brought
  A startling recollection to my mind
  Of the distinguished few among mankind,
  Who dare to step beyond their natural race,
  As thou seem'st now to do:--nor was a thought
  Denied--that even I might one day trace             1820.

The text of 1836 returns to that of 1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Professor Dowden directs attention to the relation between
these lines and the poem beginning "If thou indeed derive thy light from
Heaven."--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





MEMORIALS OF A TOUR IN SCOTLAND

1803

These poems were first collected, under the above title, in the edition
of 1827. In 1807, nine of them--viz. 'Rob Roy's Grave', 'The Solitary
Reaper', 'Stepping Westward', 'Glen Almain, or, The Narrow Glen', 'The
Matron of Jedborough and her Husband', 'To a Highland Girl', 'Sonnet',
'To the Sons of Burns after visiting the Grave of their Father', 'Yarrow
Unvisited',--were printed under the title, "Poems written during a Tour
in Scotland." This group begins the second volume of the edition of that
year. But in 1815 and 1820--when Wordsworth began to arrange his poems
in groups--they were distributed with the rest of the series in the
several artificial sections. Although some were composed after the Tour
was finished--and the order in which Wordsworth placed them is not the
order of the Scotch Tour itself--it is advisable to keep to his own
method of arrangement in dealing with this particular group, for the
same reason that we retain it in such a series as the Duddon
Sonnets.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





DEPARTURE FROM THE VALE OF GRASMERE. AUGUST, 1803 [A]


Composed 1811.--Published 1827


[Mr. Coleridge, my sister, and myself started together from Town-end to
make a tour in Scotland. Poor Coleridge was at that time in bad spirits,
and somewhat too much in love with his own dejection; and he departed
from us, as is recorded in my Sister's Journal, soon after we left Loch
Lomond. The verses that stand foremost among these Memorials were not
actually written for the occasion, but transplanted from my 'Epistle to
Sir George Beaumont'.--I. F.]




  The gentlest Shade that walked Elysian plains
  Might sometimes covet dissoluble chains;
  Even for the tenants of the zone that lies
  Beyond the stars, celestial Paradise,
  Methinks 'twould heighten joy, to overleap                    5
  At will the crystal battlements, and peep
  Into some other region, though less fair,
  To see how things are made and managed there.
  Change for the worse might please, incursion bold
  Into the tracts of darkness and of cold;                     10
  O'er Limbo lake with aery flight to steer,
  And on the verge of Chaos hang in fear.
  Such animation often do I find,
  Power in my breast, wings growing in my mind,
  Then, when some rock or hill is overpast,                    15
  Perchance without one look behind me cast,
  Some barrier with which Nature, from the birth
  Of things, has fenced this fairest spot on earth.
  O pleasant transit, Grasmere! to resign
  Such happy fields, abodes so calm as thine;                  20
  Not like an outcast with himself at strife;
  The slave of business, time, or care for life,
  But moved by choice; or, if constrained in part,
  Yet still with Nature's freedom at the heart;--
  To cull contentment upon wildest shores,                     25
  And luxuries extract from bleakest moors;
  With prompt embrace all beauty to enfold,
  And having rights in all that we behold.
--Then why these lingering steps?--A bright adieu,
  For a brief absence, proves that love is true;               30
  Ne'er can the way be irksome or forlorn
  That winds into itself for sweet return.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This first poem referring to the Scottish Tour of 1803, was
not actually written till 1811. It originally formed the opening
paragraph of the 'Epistle to Sir George Beaumont'. Wordsworth himself
dated it 1804. It is every way desirable that it should introduce the
series of poems referring to the Tour of 1803.--Ed.]


The following is from Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections of a Tour made
in Scotland':

  "William and I parted from Mary on Sunday afternoon, August 14th,
  1803; and William, Coleridge, and I left Keswick on Monday morning,
  the 15th."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





AT THE GRAVE OF BURNS, 1803. SEVEN YEARS AFTER HIS DEATH


Composed 1803. [A]--Published 1842


[For illustration, see my Sister's Journal. It may be proper to add that
the second of these pieces, though _felt_ at the time, was not composed
till many years after.--I. F.]




  I shiver, Spirit fierce and bold,
  At thought of what I now behold:
  As vapours breathed from dungeons cold
      Strike pleasure dead,
  So sadness comes from out [1] the mould                     5
      Where Burns is laid.

  And have I then thy bones so near,
  And thou forbidden to appear?
  As if it were thyself that's here
      I shrink with pain;                                    10
  And both my wishes and my fear
      Alike are vain.
  [2]
  Off weight--nor press on weight!--away
  Dark thoughts!--they came, but not to stay;
  With chastened feelings would I pay                        15
      The tribute due
  To him, and aught that hides his clay
      From mortal view.

  Fresh as the flower, whose modest worth
  He sang, his genius "glinted" forth, [B]                   20
  Rose like a star that touching earth,
      For so it seems,
  Doth glorify its humble birth
      With matchless beams.

  The piercing eye, the thoughtful brow,                     25
  The struggling heart, where be they now?--
  Full soon the Aspirant of the plough,
      The prompt, the brave,
  Slept, with the obscurest, in the low
      And silent grave.                                      30

  I mourned with thousands, but as one
  More deeply grieved, for He was gone
  Whose light I hailed when first it shone,
      And showed my youth [3]
  How Verse may build a princely throne                      35
      On humble truth.

  Alas! where'er the current tends,
  Regret pursues and with it blends,--
  Huge Criffel's hoary top ascends
      By Skiddaw seen,--40
  Neighbours we were, and loving friends
      We might have been;

  True friends though diversely inclined;
  But heart with heart and mind with mind,
  Where the main fibres are entwined,                        45
      Through Nature's skill,
  May even by contraries be joined
      More closely still.

  The tear will start, and let it flow;
  Thou "poor Inhabitant below," [C]                          50
  At this dread moment--even so--
      Might we together
  Have sate and talked where gowans blow,
      Or on wild heather.

  What treasures would have then been placed                 55
  Within my reach; of knowledge graced
  By fancy what a rich repast!
      But why go on?--
  Oh! spare to sweep, thou mournful blast,
      His grave grass-grown.                                 60

  There, too, a Son, his joy and pride,
  (Not three weeks past the Stripling died,)
  Lies gathered to his Father's side,
      Soul-moving sight!
  Yet one to which is not denied                             65
      Some sad delight.

  For _he_ is safe, a quiet bed
  Hath early found among the dead,
  Harboured where none can be misled,
      Wronged, or distrest;                                  70
  And surely here it may be said
      That such are blest.

  And oh for Thee, by pitying grace
  Checked oft-times in a devious race,
  May He who halloweth the place                             75
      Where Man is laid
  Receive thy Spirit in the embrace
      For which it prayed!

  Sighing I turned away; but ere
  Night fell I heard, or seemed to hear,                     80
  Music that sorrow comes not near,
      A ritual hymn,
  Chanted in love that casts out fear
      By Seraphim. [D]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1842.

  ... out of ...    MS.]


[Variant 2:

  But wherefore tremble? 'tis no place
  Of pain and sorrow, but of grace,
  Of shelter, and of silent peace,
      And "friendly aid";
  Grasped is he now in that embrace
      For which he prayed. [a]        MS.]


[Variant 3:

1845.

  Well might I mourn that He was gone
  Whose light I hailed when first it shone,
  When, breaking forth as nature's own,
      It showed my youth                 1842.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: It is dated thus by Wordsworth himself on three occasions,
and the year of its composition is also indicated in the title of the
poem.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Burns's poem 'To a Mountain Daisy', l. 15.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: See Burns's 'A Bard's Epitaph', l. 19.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Compare 'The Tomb of Burns', by William Watson, 1895.--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a:  See in his poem the 'Ode to Ruin'.--Ed.]



The following is an extract from Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal of the
Tour in Scotland:

  "Thursday, August 18th.--Went to the churchyard where Burns is
  buried. A bookseller accompanied us. He showed us the outside of
  Burns's house, where he had lived the last three years of his life,
  and where he died. It has a mean appearance, and is in a bye
  situation, whitewashed.... Went on to visit his grave. He lies at a
  corner of the churchyard, and his second son, Francis Wallace, beside
  him. There is no stone to mark the spot; but a hundred guineas have
  been collected, to be expended on some sort of monument.

    'There,' said the bookseller, pointing to a pompous monument, 'there
    lies Mr. Such-a-one. I have forgotten his name. A remarkably clever
    man; he was an attorney, and hardly ever lost a cause he undertook.
    Burns made many a lampoon upon him, and there they rest, as you
    see.'

  We looked at the grave with melancholy and painful reflections,
  repeating to each other his own verses.

    'Is there a man whose judgment clear,
    Can others teach the way to steer,
    Yet runs himself life's mad career,
                Wild as the wave?
    Here let him pause, and through a tear
                Survey this grave.

    The poor Inhabitant below
    Was quick to learn, and wise to know,
    And keenly felt the friendly glow,
                And softer flame;
    But thoughtless follies laid him low
                And stained his name.'

  "I cannot take leave of the country which we passed through to-day
  without mentioning that we saw the Cumberland Mountains, within
  half-a-mile of Ellisland, Burns's house, the last view we had of them.
  Drayton has prettily described the connection which this neighbourhood
  has with ours when he makes Skiddaw say:

                     'Seurfell [E] from the sky,
    That Anadale [F] doth crown, with a most amorous eye,
    Salutes me every day, or at my pride looks grim,
    Oft threatening me with clouds, as I oft threatening him!'

  "These lines recurred to William's memory, and we talked of Burns, and
  of the prospect he must have had, perhaps from his own door, of
  Skiddaw and his companions, including ourselves in the fancy, that we
  _might_ have been personally known to each other, and he have looked
  upon those objects with more pleasure for our sakes."

Ed.


[Footnote E: Criffel.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Annandale.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THOUGHTS SUGGESTED THE DAY FOLLOWING, ON THE BANKS OF NITH, NEAR THE
POET'S RESIDENCE


Composed 1803. [A]--Published 1842




  Too frail to keep the lofty vow
  That must have followed when his brow
  Was wreathed--"The Vision" [B] tells us how--
        With holly spray,
  He faultered, drifted to and fro,                           5
        And passed away.

  Well might such thoughts, dear Sister, throng
  Our minds when, lingering all too long,
  Over the grave of Burns we hung
        In social grief--10
  Indulged as if it were a wrong
        To seek relief.

  But, leaving each unquiet theme
  Where gentlest judgments may misdeem,
  And prompt to welcome every gleam                          15
        Of good and fair,
  Let us beside this limpid Stream
        Breathe hopeful air.

  Enough of sorrow, wreck, and blight;
  Think rather of those moments bright                       20
  When to the consciousness of right
        His course was true,
  When Wisdom prospered in his sight
        And virtue grew.

  Yes, freely let our hearts expand,                         25
  Freely as in youth's season bland,
  When side by side, his Book in hand,
        We wont to stray,
  Our pleasure varying at command
        Of each sweet Lay.                                   30

  How oft inspired must he have trod
  These pathways, yon far-stretching road!
  There lurks his home; in that Abode,
        With mirth elate,
  Or in his nobly-pensive mood,                              35
        The Rustic sate.

  Proud thoughts that Image overawes,
  Before it humbly let us pause,
  And ask of Nature, from what cause
      And by what rules                                      40
  She trained her Burns to win applause
      That shames the Schools.

  Through busiest street and loneliest glen
  Are felt the flashes of his pen;
  He rules mid winter snows, and when                        45
      Bees fill their hives;
  Deep in the general heart of men
      His power survives.

  What need of fields in some far clime
  Where Heroes, Sages, Bards sublime,                        50
  And all that fetched the flowing rhyme
        From genuine springs,
  Shall dwell together till old Time
        Folds up his wings?

  Sweet Mercy! to the gates of Heaven                        55
  This Minstrel lead, his sins forgiven;
  The rueful conflict, the heart riven
        With vain endeavour,
  And memory of Earth's bitter leaven,
        Effaced for ever.                                    60

  But why to Him confine the prayer,
  When kindred thoughts and yearnings bear
  On the frail heart the purest share
      With all that live?--
  The best of what we do and are,                            65
      Just God, forgive!


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Though "suggested" on "the day following," these stanzas
were not written then; but "many years after." They must, however, find
a place in the "Memorials" of this 1803 Tour in Scotland.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Burns's poem, thus named.--Ed.]



See the note to the previous poem. The line

  'These pathways, yon far-stretching road!'

refers probably to the road to Brownhill, past Ellisland farmhouse
where Burns lived. "The day following" would be Aug. 19th,
1803. The extract which follows from the Journal is a further
illustration of the poem. August 8th.

  "... Travelled through the vale of Nith, here little like a vale, it
  is so broad, with irregular hills rising up on each side, in outline
  resembling the old-fashioned valances of a bed. There is a great deal
  of arable land; the corn ripe; trees here and there--plantations,
  clumps, coppices, a newness in everything. So much of the gorse and
  broom rooted out that you wonder why it is not all gone, and yet there
  seems to be almost as much gorse and broom as corn; and they grow one
  among another you know not how. Crossed the Nith; the vale becomes
  narrow, and very pleasant; cornfields, green hills, clay cottages; the
  river's bed rocky, with woody banks. Left the Nith about a mile and a
  half, and reached Brownhill, a lonely inn, where we slept. The view
  from the windows was pleasing, though some travellers might have been
  disposed to quarrel with it for its general nakedness; yet there was
  abundance of corn. It is an open country--open, yet all over hills. At
  a little distance were many cottages among trees, that looked very
  pretty. Brownhill is about seven or eight miles from Ellisland. I
  fancied to myself, while I was sitting in the parlour, that Burns
  might have caroused there, for most likely his rounds extended so far,
  and this thought gave a melancholy interest to the smoky walls...."

On Dec. 23, 1839, Wordsworth wrote to Professor Henry Reed,
Philadelphia:

  "The other day I chanced to be looking over a MS. poem belonging to
  the year 1803, though not actually composed till many years
  afterwards. It was suggested by visiting the neighbourhood of
  Dumfries, in which Burns had resided, and where he died: it concluded
  thus:

    'Sweet Mercy! to the gates of Heaven, etc.'

  I instantly added, the other day,

    'But why to Him confine the prayer, etc.'

  The more I reflect upon this, the more I feel justified in attaching
  comparatively small importance to any literary monument that I may be
  enabled to leave behind. It is well however, I am convinced, that men
  think otherwise in the earlier part of their lives...."

It may be mentioned that in his note to the "Poems, chiefly
of Early and Late Years," (1842), Wordsworth does not quote
from the text of his sister's Journal,--which was first published
in 1875,--but from some other copy of it.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE SONS OF BURNS, AFTER VISITING THE GRAVE OF THEIR FATHER [A]


Composed before 1807 [B]--Published 1807


The Poet's grave is in a corner of the church-yard. We looked at it with
melancholy and painful reflections, repeating to each other his own
verses:

  'Is there a man whose judgment clear, etc.'

'Extract from the Journal of my Fellow-Traveller.'--W. W. 1827. [C]

One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection" in the 1815 and 1820
editions.--Ed.




  'Mid crowded obelisks and urns
  I sought the untimely grave of Burns;
  Sons of the Bard, my heart still mourns
      With sorrow true;
  And more would grieve, but that it turns                  5
      Trembling to you!

  Through twilight shades of good and ill
  Ye now are panting up life's hill, [1]
  And more than common strength and skill
      Must ye display;                                     10
  If ye would give the better will
      Its lawful sway.

  Hath Nature strung your nerves to bear
  Intemperance with less harm, beware!
  But if the Poet's wit ye share,                          15
      Like him can speed
  The social hour--of tenfold care [2]
      There will be need;

  For honest men delight will take
  To spare your failings for his sake,                     20
  Will flatter you,--and fool and rake [3]
      Your steps pursue;
  And of your Father's name will make
      A snare for you.

  Far from their noisy haunts retire,                      25
  And add your voices to the quire
  That sanctify the cottage fire
      With service meet;
  There seek the genius of your Sire,
      His spirit greet;                                    30

  Or where,'mid "lonely heights and hows," [D]
  He paid to Nature tuneful vows;
  Or wiped his honourable brows
      Bedewed with toil,
  While reapers strove, or busy ploughs                    35
      Upturned the soil;

  His judgment with benignant ray
  Shall guide, his fancy cheer, your way;
  But ne'er to a seductive lay
      Let faith be given;                                  40
  Nor deem that "light which leads astray,
      Is light from Heaven." [E]

  Let no mean hope your souls enslave;
  Be independent, generous, brave;
  Your Father such example gave,                           45
      And such revere;
  But be admonished by his grave,
      And think, and fear! [F]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  Ye now are panting up life's hill!
  'Tis twilight time of good and ill,    1807.]


[Variant 2:

1840.

  Strong bodied if ye be to bear
  Intemperance with less harm, beware!
  But if your Father's wit ye share,
      Then, then indeed,
  Ye Sons of Burns! for watchful care     1807.

  ... for tenfold care                    1827.

The text of 1827 is otherwise identical with that of 1840.]


[Variant 3:

1840.

  For honest men delight will take
  To shew you favor for his sake,
  Will flatter you; and Fool and Rake     1807.

  For their beloved Poet's sake,
  Even honest men delight will take
  To flatter you; ...                     1820.

  Even honest Men delight will take
  To spare your failings for his sake,
  Will flatter you,--...                 1827.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In the edition of 1807, this poem has the title 'Address to
the Sons of Burns after visiting their Father's Grave (August 14th,
1803)'. Slight changes were made in the title afterwards.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Dorothy Wordsworth wrote, in her 'Recollections' of this
tour, under date August 18th, 1803,

  "William wrote long afterwards the following Address to the sons of
  the ill-fated poet."

Ed.]


[Footnote C: This explanatory note appears in every edition of the Poems
from 1827 to 1850. It is taken (but not literally) from the
'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland' as published in 1875.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: From Burns's 'Epistle to James Smith', l. 53.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: From Burns's poem, 'The Vision', Duan Second.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: In the edition of 1807, the poem began with what is now the
second stanza, and consisted of four stanzas only, viz. Nos. ii., iii.,
iv., and viii. Stanzas i., v., vi., and vii. were added in 1827. Stanza
iii. was omitted in 1820, but restored in 1827.--Ed.]



In Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections' of this Tour we find, under date
August 18, 1803:

  "The grave of Burns's Son, which we had just seen by the side of his
  Father, and some stories heard at Dumfries respecting the dangers his
  surviving children were exposed to, filled us with melancholy
  concern, which had a kind of connection with ourselves."


  "The body of Burns was not allowed to remain long in this place. To
  suit the plan of a rather showy mausoleum his remains were removed
  into a more commodious spot of the same kirkyard on the 5th July
  1815."--(Allan Cunningham.)

'Ellen Irwin; or, the Braes of Kirtle', comes next in this series of
"Memorials of a Tour in Scotland, 1803." It has already been printed,
however, (p. 124), in its proper chronological place, among the poems
belonging to the year 1800.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO A HIGHLAND GIRL

(AT INVERSNEYDE, UPON LOCH LOMOND)


Composed 1803.--Published 1807


Classed in 1815 and 1820 as one of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.

[This delightful creature and her demeanour are particularly described
in my Sister's Journal. The sort of prophecy with which the verses
conclude has, through God's goodness, been realized; and now,
approaching the close of my 73rd year, I have a most vivid remembrance
of her and the beautiful objects with which she was surrounded. She is
alluded to in the poem of 'The Three Cottage Girls' among my Continental
Memorials. In illustration of this class of poems I have scarcely
anything to say beyond what is anticipated in my Sister's faithful and
admirable Journal.--I. F.]




  Sweet Highland Girl, a very shower
  Of beauty is thy earthly dower!
  Twice seven consenting years have shed
  Their utmost bounty on thy head:
  And these grey rocks; that [1] household lawn;                5
  Those trees, [A] a veil just half withdrawn;
  This fall of water that doth make
  A murmur near the silent lake;
  This little bay; a quiet road
  That holds in shelter thy Abode--10
  In truth together do ye seem [2]
  Like something fashioned in a dream;
  Such Forms as from their covert peep
  When earthly cares are laid asleep!
  But, O fair Creature! in the light                           15
  Of common day, so heavenly bright, [3]
  I bless Thee, Vision [4] as thou art,
  I bless thee with a human heart;
  God shield thee to thy latest years!
  Thee, neither know I, [5] nor thy peers;                     20
  And yet my eyes are filled with tears.

    With earnest feeling I shall pray
  For thee when I am far away:
  For never saw I mien, or face,
  In which more plainly I could trace                          25
  Benignity and home-bred sense
  Ripening in perfect innocence.
  Here scattered, like a random seed,
  Remote from men, Thou dost not need
  The embarrassed look of shy distress,                        30
  And maidenly shamefacedness:
  Thou wear'st upon thy forehead clear
  The freedom of a Mountaineer:
  A face with gladness overspread!
  Soft smiles, [6] by human kindness bred!                     35
  And seemliness complete, that sways
  Thy courtesies, about thee plays;
  With no restraint, but such as springs
  From quick and eager visitings
  Of thoughts that lie beyond the reach                        40
  Of thy few words of English speech:
  A bondage sweetly brooked, a strife
  That gives thy gestures grace and life!
  So have I, not unmoved in mind,
  Seen birds of tempest-loving kind--45
  Thus beating up against the wind.

    What hand but would a garland cull
  For thee who art so beautiful?
  O happy pleasure! here to dwell
  Beside thee in some heathy dell;                             50
  Adopt your homely ways and dress,
  A Shepherd, thou a Shepherdess!
  But I could frame a wish for thee
  More like a grave reality:
  Thou art to me but as a wave                                 55
  Of the wild sea; and I would have
  Some claim upon thee, if I could,
  Though but of common neighbourhood.
  What joy to hear thee, and to see!
  Thy elder Brother I would be,                                60
  Thy Father--anything to thee! [B]

    Now thanks to Heaven! that of its grace
  Hath led me to this lonely place.
  Joy have I had; and going hence
  I bear away my recompence.                                   65
  In spots like these it is we prize
  Our Memory, feel that she hath eyes:
  Then, why should I be loth to stir?
  I feel this place was made for her;
  To give new pleasure like the past,                          70
  Continued long as life shall last.
  Nor am I loth, though pleased at heart,
  Sweet Highland Girl! from thee to part;
  For I, methinks, till I grow old,
  As fair before me shall behold,                              75
  As I do now, the cabin small,
  The lake, the bay, the waterfall;
  And Thee, the Spirit of them all!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  ... this ...     1807.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  In truth together ye do seem     1807.

  In truth, unfolding thus, ye seem      1837.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1827.]


[Variant 3: The two preceding lines were added in 1845.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

  Yet, dream and vision ...      1807.

  ... or vision ...              1837.]


[Variant 5:

1845.

  I neither know thee ...      1807.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  Sweet looks, ...      1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A:

  "The distribution of 'these,' 'that,' and 'those' in these two lines,
  was attained in 1845, after various changes. "

(Edward Dowden.)]


[Footnote B: Compare Virgil's 'Eclogues', x. 35:

  'Atque utinam ex vobis unus, etc.'

Ed.]



In her 'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland', 1803, Dorothy
Wordsworth writes:

  "Sunday, August 28th.--... After long waiting, the girls, who had been
  on the look-out, informed us that the boat was coming. I went to the
  waterside, and saw a cluster of people on the opposite shore; but,
  being yet at a distance, they looked more like soldiers surrounding a
  carriage than a group of men and women; red and green were the
  distinguishable colours. We hastened to get ourselves ready as soon as
  we saw the party approach, but had longer to wait than we expected,
  the lake being wider than it appears to be. As they drew near we could
  distinguish men in tartan plaids, women in scarlet cloaks, and green
  umbrellas by the half-dozen. The landing was as pretty a sight as ever
  I saw. The bay, which had been so quiet two days before, was all in
  motion with small waves, while the swollen waterfall roared in our
  ears. The boat came steadily up, being pressed almost to the water's
  edge by the weight of its cargo; perhaps twenty people landed, one
  after another. It did not rain much, but the women held up their
  umbrellas; they were dressed in all the colours of the rainbow, and
  with their scarlet cardinals, the tartan plaids of the men, and Scotch
  bonnets, made a gay appearance. There was a joyous bustle surrounding
  the boat, which even imparted something of the same character to the
  waterfall in its tumult, and the restless grey waves; the young men
  laughed and shouted, the lasses laughed, and the elder folks seemed to
  be in a bustle to be away. I remember well with what haste the
  mistress of the house where we were ran up to seek after her child,
  and seeing us, how anxiously and kindly she inquired how we had fared,
  if we had had a good fire, had been well waited upon, etc. All this in
  three minutes--for the boatman had another party to bring from the
  other side, and hurried us off.

  "The hospitality we had met with at the two cottages and Mr.
  Macfarlane's gave us very favourable impressions on this our first
  entrance into the Highlands, and at this day the innocent merriment of
  the girls, with their kindness to us, and the beautiful face and
  figure of the elder, come to my mind whenever I think of the
  ferry-house and waterfall of Loch Lomond, and I never think of the two
  girls but the whole image of that romantic spot is before me, a living
  image as it will be to my dying day. The following poem was written by
  William not long after our return from Scotland."

Compare the poem called 'The Three Cottage Girls', in the "Memorials of
a Tour on the Continent, 1820," published in 1822.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





GLEN-ALMAIN; OR, THE NARROW GLEN


Composed (possibly) in 1803.--Published 1807


Classed in 1815 and 1820 with the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  In this still place, remote from men,
  Sleeps Ossian, in the NARROW GLEN;
  In this still place, where murmurs on
  But one meek streamlet, only one:
  He sang of battles, and the breath                             5
  Of stormy war, and violent death;
  And should, methinks, when all was past,
  Have rightfully been laid at last
  Where rocks were rudely heaped, and rent
  As by a spirit turbulent;                                     10
  Where sights were rough, and sounds were wild,
  And everything unreconciled;
  In some complaining, dim retreat,
  For fear and melancholy meet;
  But this is calm; there cannot be                             15
  A more entire tranquillity.

    Does then the Bard sleep here indeed?
  Or is it but a groundless creed?
  What matters it?--I blame them not
  Whose Fancy in this lonely Spot                               20
  Was moved; and in such [1] way expressed
  Their notion of its perfect rest.
  A convent, even a hermit's cell,
  Would break the silence of this Dell: [A]
  It is not quiet, is not ease;                                 25
  But something deeper far than these:
  The separation that is here
  Is of the grave; and of austere
  Yet [2] happy feelings of the dead:
  And, therefore, was it rightly said                           30
  That Ossian, last of all his race!
  Lies buried in this lonely place.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  ... in this ...      1807.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  And ...       1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare the poem 'To the Lady Fleming', stanza iii. ll.
28-9.--Ed.]


The glen is Glenalmond, in Perthshire, between Crieff and Amulree, known
locally as "the Sma' Glen." I am not aware that it was ever called "Glen
Almain," till Wordsworth gave it that singularly un-Scottish name. [B]
It must have been a warm August day, after a tract of dry weather, when
he went through it, or the Almond would scarcely have been called a
"small streamlet." In many seasons of the year the distinctive features
of the Glen would be more appropriately indicated by the words, which
the poet uses by way of contrast with his own experience of it, viz. a
place

  'Where sights are rough, and sounds are wild,
  And everything unreconciled.'

But his characterization of the place--a glen, the charm of which is
little known--in the stillness of an autumn afternoon, is as true to
nature as any of his interpretations of the spirit of the hills and
vales of Westmoreland. As yet there is no farm-house, scarcely even a
sheiling, to "break the silence of this Dell."

The following is Dorothy Wordsworth's account of their walk through it
on Friday, September 9th, 1803:

  "Entered the glen at a small hamlet at some distance from the head,
  and, turning aside a few steps, ascended a hillock which commanded a
  view to the top of it--a very sweet scene, a green valley, not very
  narrow, with a few scattered trees and huts, almost invisible in a
  misty green of afternoon light. At this hamlet we crossed a bridge,
  and the road led us down the glen, which had become exceedingly
  narrow, and so continued to the end: the hills on both sides heathy
  and rocky, very steep, but continuous; the rock not single or
  overhanging, not scooped into caverns, or sounding with torrents;
  there are no trees, no houses, no traces of cultivation, not one
  outstanding object. It is truly a solitude, the road even making it
  appear still more so; the bottom of the valley is mostly smooth and
  level, the brook not noisy: everything is simple and undisturbed, and
  while we passed through it the whole place was shady, cool, clear, and
  solemn. At the end of the long valley we ascended a hill to a great
  height, and reached the top, when the sun, on the point of setting,
  shed a soft yellow light upon every eminence. The prospect was very
  extensive; over hollows and plains, no towns, and few houses
  visible--a prospect, extensive as it was, in harmony with the secluded
  dell, and fixing its own peculiar character of removedness from the
  world, and the secure possession of the quiet of nature more deeply in
  our minds. The following poem was written by William on hearing of a
  tradition relating to it, which we did not know when we were there."

Ed.


[Footnote B: In the Statistical Account of Scotland, however--drawn up
by the parish ministers of the county, and edited by Sir John
Sinclair--both the river and the glen are spelt Almon, by the Rev. Mr.
Erskine, who wrote the account of Monzie Parish in Perthshire. This was
in 1795. A recent authority states:

  "'Glenamon,' in Ayrshire, and 'Glenalmond,' in Perthshire, are both
  from the corrupted spelling of the word 'Avon,' which derives from its
  being very nearly the pronunciation of the Gaelic word for 'a river.'
  These names are from 'Gleann-abhuinn,' that is,'the valley of the
  river.'"

(See the 'Gaelic Topography of Scotland', by James A. Robertson,
Edinburgh, 1859.)--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





STEPPING WESTWARD


Composed between 1803 and 1805.--Published 1807


While my Fellow-traveller and I were walking by the side of Loch
Ketterine, one fine evening after sun-set, in our road to a Hut where in
the course of our Tour we had been hospitably entertained some weeks
before, we met, in one of the loneliest parts of that solitary region,
two well dressed Women, one of whom said to us, by way of greeting,
"What, you are stepping westward?"--W. W. 1807.

Classed in 1815 and 1820 among the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  "_What, you are stepping westward?"--" Yea_."
    'Twould be a _wildish_ [A] destiny,
  If we, who thus together roam
  In a strange Land, and far from home,
  Were in this place the guests of Chance:                     5
  Yet who would stop, or fear to advance,
  Though home or shelter he had none,
  With such a sky to lead him on?

  The dewy ground was dark and cold;
  Behind, all gloomy to behold;                               10
  And stepping westward seemed to be
  A kind of _heavenly_ destiny:
  I liked the greeting; 'twas a sound
  Of something without place or bound;
  And seemed to give me spiritual right                       15
  To travel through that region bright.

  The voice was soft, and she who spake
  Was walking by her native lake:
  The salutation had to me [1]
  The very sound of courtesy:                                 20
  Its power was felt; and while my eye
  Was fixed upon the glowing Sky,
  The echo of the voice enwrought
  A human sweetness with the thought
  Of travelling through the world that lay                    25
  Before me in my endless way.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  ... seemed to me

In MS. letter to Sir G. Beaumont.    N. D.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Italics were first used in 1855.--Ed.]



The following is from the 'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland':

  "Sunday, Sept. 11th.--We have never had a more delightful walk than
  this evening. Ben Lomond and the three pointed-topped mountains of
  Loch Lomond, which we had seen from the garrison, were very majestic
  under the clear sky, the lake perfectly calm, the air sweet and mild.
  I felt that it was much more interesting to visit a place where we
  have been before than it can possibly be the first time, except under
  peculiar circumstances. The sun had been set for some time, when,
  being within a quarter of a mile of the ferry man's hut, our path
  having led us close to the shore of the calm lake, we met two
  neatly-dressed women, without hats, who had probably been taking their
  Sunday evening's walk. One of them said to us in a friendly, soft tone
  of voice, 'What, you are stepping westward?' I cannot describe how
  affecting this simple expression was in that remote place, with the
  western sky in front, yet glowing with the departed sun. William wrote
  the following poem long after, in remembrance of his feelings and
  mine."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE SOLITARY REAPER


Composed between 1803 and 1805.--Published 1807


One of the "Poems of the Imagination" in 1815 and 1820.--Ed.




  Behold her, single [1] in the field,
  Yon solitary Highland Lass!
  Reaping and singing by herself;
  Stop here, or gently pass!
  Alone she cuts and binds the grain,                       5
  And sings a melancholy strain;
  O listen! for the Vale profound
  Is overflowing with the sound.

  No Nightingale did ever chaunt
  More welcome notes to weary bands [2]                    10
  Of travellers in some shady haunt,
  Among Arabian sands:
  A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard [3]
  In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird,
  Breaking the silence of the seas [A]                     15
  Among the farthest Hebrides.

  Will no one tell me what she sings?--
  Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow
  For old, unhappy, far-off things,
  And battles long ago:                                    20
  Or is it some more humble lay,
  Familiar matter of to-day?
  Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,
  That has been, and may be again?

  Whate'er the theme, the Maiden sang [4]                  25
  As if her song could have no ending;
  I saw her singing at her work,
  And o'er the sickle bending;--
  I listened, motionless and still; [5]
  And, as [6] I mounted up the hill,                       30
  The music in my heart I bore,
  Long after it was heard no more.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  ... singing ...

MS.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  So sweetly to reposing bands    1807.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  No sweeter voice was ever heard         1807.

  ... sound ...                           MS.

  Such thrilling voice was never heard    1827.]


[Variant 4:

1815.

  ... sung    1807.]


[Variant 5:

1820.

  I listen'd till I had my fill:      1807.]


[Variant 6:

1807.

  And when ...        1827.

The text of 1837 returns to that of 1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare 'The Ancient Mariner'(part ii. stanza 6):

  'And we did speak only to break
  The silence of the sea.'

Ed.]



The following is from Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections' of the Tour:
13th Sept. 1803.

  "As we descended, the scene became more fertile, our way being
  pleasantly varied--through coppices or open fields, and passing
  farm-houses, though always with an intermixture of cultivated ground.
  It was harvest-time, and the fields were quietly--might I be allowed
  to say pensively?--enlivened by small companies of reapers. It is not
  uncommon in the more lonely parts of the Highlands to see a single
  person so employed. The following poem was suggested to William by a
  beautiful sentence in Thomas Wilkinson's 'Tour in Scotland.'"

In a note appended to the editions 1807 to 1820, Wordsworth wrote:

  "This Poem was suggested by a beautiful sentence in a MS. 'Tour in
  Scotland,' written by a Friend, the last line being taken from it
  _verbatim_."

The first part of Wilkinson's 'Tours to the British Mountains', which
was published in 1824, narrates his journey in Scotland (it took place
in 1787); and the following sentence occurs in the record of his travels
near Loch Lomond (p. 12),

  "Passed a female who was reaping alone: she sung in Erse, as she
  bended over her sickle; the sweetest human voice I ever heard: her
  strains were tenderly melancholy, and felt delicious, long after they
  were heard no more."

There can be no doubt that this is the sentence referred to both by
Dorothy and William Wordsworth. Thomas Wilkinson was the friend, in
whose memory Wordsworth wrote the poem 'To the Spade of a Friend,
composed while we were labouring together in his pleasure-ground'. They
were comparatively near neighbours, as Wilkinson lived near Yanwath on
the Emont; and he had given his MS. to the Wordsworth family to read. I
have received some additional information about this MS., and
Wordsworth's knowledge of it, from Mr. Wilson Robinson, who writes,

  "From all the evidence, I conclude that Wilkinson's 'Tour to the
  Highlands' was shown in manuscript to his friends soon after his
  return;--that he was not only willing to show it, but even to allow it
  to be copied, though reluctant to publish it;--that there was
  sufficient intimacy between him and the Wordsworths to account for his
  showing or lending the manuscript to them, especially as they had
  travelled over much of the same ground, and would therefore be more
  interested in it; and that in fact it was never published till 1824."

When Wordsworth was living at Coleorton during the late autumn of 1806
he wrote to Wilkinson:

  "... What shall I say in apology for your Journal, which is now locked
  up with my manuscripts at Grasmere. As I could not go over to your
  part of the country myself, my intention was to have taken it with me
  to Kendal ... to be carefully transmitted to you; unluckily, most
  unluckily, in the hurry of departure, I forgot it, together with two
  of my own manuscripts which were along with it; and I am afraid you
  will be standing in great need of it.... If you do not want it, it is
  in a place where it can take no injury, and I may have the pleasure of
  delivering it to you myself in the spring...."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





ADDRESS TO KILCHURN CASTLE

UPON LOCH AWE


Begun 1803.--Published 1827


  "From the top of the hill a most impressive scene opened upon our
  view,--a ruined Castle on an Island (for an Island the flood had made
  it) [A] at some distance from the shore, backed by a Cove of the
  Mountain Cruachan, down which came a foaming stream. The Castle
  occupied every foot of the Island that was visible to us, appearing to
  rise out of the Water,--mists rested upon the mountain side, with
  spots of sunshine; there was a mild desolation in the low-grounds, a
  solemn grandeur in the mountains, and the Castle was wild, yet
  stately--not dismantled of Turrets--nor the walls broken down, though
  obviously a ruin."

'Extract from the Journal of my Companion.'--W. W. 1827.

[The first three lines were thrown off at the moment I first caught
sight of the Ruin, from a small eminence by the wayside; the rest was
added many years after.--I.F.]




  Child of loud-throated War! the mountain Stream
  Roars in thy hearing; but thy hour of rest
  Is come, and thou art silent in thy age;
  Save when the wind sweeps by and sounds are caught
  Ambiguous, neither wholly thine nor theirs.                      5
  Oh! there is life that breathes not; Powers there are
  That touch each other to the quick in modes
  Which the gross world no sense hath to perceive,
  No soul to dream of. What art Thou, from care
  Cast off--abandoned by thy rugged Sire,                         10
  Nor by soft Peace adopted; though, in place
  And in dimension, such that thou might'st seem
  But a mere footstool to yon sovereign Lord,
  Huge Cruachan, (a thing that meaner hills
  Might crush, nor know that it had suffered harm;)               15
  Yet he, not loth, in favour of thy claims
  To reverence, suspends his own; submitting
  All that the God of Nature hath conferred,
  All that he holds [1] in common with the stars,
  To the memorial majesty of Time                                 20
  Impersonated in thy calm decay!

  Take, then, thy seat, Vicegerent unreproved!
  Now, while a farewell gleam of evening light
  Is fondly lingering on thy shattered front,
  Do thou, in turn, be paramount; and rule                        25
  Over the pomp and beauty of a scene
  Whose mountains, torrents, lake, and woods, unite
  To pay thee homage; and with these are joined,
  In willing admiration and respect,
  Two Hearts, which in thy presence might be called               30
  Youthful as Spring.--Shade of departed Power,
  Skeleton of unfleshed humanity,
  The chronicle were welcome that should call
  Into the compass of distinct regard
  The toils and struggles of thy infant years! [2]                35
  Yon foaming flood seems motionless as ice;
  Its dizzy turbulence eludes the eye,
  Frozen by distance; so, majestic Pile,
  To the perception of this Age, appear
  Thy fierce beginnings, softened and subdued                     40
  And quieted in character--the strife,
  The pride, the fury uncontrollable,
  Lost on the aerial heights of the Crusades!" [B]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  ... has ...      1827.]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  ... of thy infancy!      1827.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The clause within brackets was added in 1837.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: The Tradition is, that the Castle was built by a Lady
during the absence of her Lord in Palestine.--W. W. 1827.]



From the following passage in Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections' of
their Tour, it will be seen that the poet altered the text considerably
in making his quotation in 1827: August 31, 1803.

  "When we had ascended half-way up the hill, directed by the man, I
  took a nearer foot-path, and at the top came in view of a most
  impressive scene, a ruined castle on an island almost in the middle of
  the last compartment of the lake, backed by a mountain cove, down
  which came a roaring stream. The castle occupied every foot of the
  island that was visible to us, appearing to rise out of the water;
  mists rested upon the mountain side, with spots of sunshine between;
  there was a mild desolation in the low grounds, a solemn grandeur in
  the mountains, and the castle was wild, yet stately, not dismantled of
  its turrets, nor the walls broken down, though completely in ruin.
  After having stood some minutes I joined William on the highroad, and
  both wishing to stay longer near this place, we requested the man to
  drive his little boy on to Dalmally, about two miles further, and
  leave the car at the inn. He told us the ruin was called Kilchurn
  Castle, that it belonged to Lord Breadalbane, and had been built by
  one of the ladies of that family for her defence, during her lord's
  absence at the Crusades; for which purpose she levied a tax of seven
  years' rent upon her tenants; he said that from that side of the lake
  it did not appear, in very dry weather, to stand upon an island, but
  that it was possible to go over to it without being wet-shod. We were
  very lucky in seeing it after a great flood; for its enchanting effect
  was chiefly owing to its situation in the lake, a decayed palace
  rising out of the plain of waters! I have called it a palace, for such
  feeling it gave me, though having been built as a place of defence, a
  castle or fortress. We turned again and reascended the hill, and sate
  a long time in the middle of it looking on the castle, and the huge
  mountain cove opposite, and William, addressing himself to the ruin,
  poured out these verses."

Compare Wordsworth's description of this ruin in his 'Guide through the
District of the Lakes'.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





ROB ROY'S GRAVE


Composed between 1803 and 1805.--Published 1807


The History of Rob Roy is sufficiently known; his Grave is near the head
of Loch Ketterine, in one of those small Pin-fold-like Burial-grounds,
of neglected and desolate appearance, which the Traveller meets with in
the Highlands of Scotland.--W. W. 1807.

[I have since been told that I was misinformed as to the burial-place of
Rob Roy. If so, I may plead in excuse that I wrote on apparently good
authority, namely, that of a well educated Lady who lived at the head of
the Lake, within a mile or less of the point indicated as containing the
remains of One so famous in the neighbourhood.--I. F.]

In the copy of 'Rob Roy's Grave', transcribed in Dorothy Wordsworth's
'Recollections' of the Tour in Scotland of 1803, there are several
important variations of text, which occur in none of the printed
editions of the poem. These are indicated (to distinguish them from
other readings) by the initials D. W.--Ed.

One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection" in 1815 and 1820.--Ed.




  A famous man is Robin Hood,
  The English ballad-singer's joy!
  And Scotland has a thief as good,
  An outlaw of as daring mood;

  She has her brave ROB ROY! [1]                               5
  Then clear the weeds from off his Grave,
  And let us chant a passing stave,
  In honour of that Hero [2] brave!

  Heaven gave Rob Roy a dauntless [3] heart
  And wondrous length and strength of arm: [A]                10
  Nor craved he more to quell his foes,
    Or keep his friends from harm.

  Yet was Rob Roy as _wise_ as brave;
  Forgive me if the phrase be strong;--
  A Poet worthy of Rob Roy                                    15
    Must scorn a timid song.

  Say, then, that he was wise as brave;
  As wise in thought as bold in deed:
  For in the principles of things
    _He_ sought his moral creed. [4]                          20

  Said generous Rob, "What need of books?
  Burn all the statutes and their shelves:
  They stir us up against our kind;
    And worse, against ourselves.

  "We have a passion--make a law,                             25
  Too false to guide us or control!
  And for the law itself we fight
    In bitterness of soul.

  "And, puzzled, blinded thus, we lose
  Distinctions that are plain and few:                        30
  These find I graven on my heart:
    _That_ tells me what to do.

  "The creatures see of flood and field,
  And those that travel on the wind!
  With them no strife can last; they live                     35
    In peace, and peace of mind.

  "For why?--because the good old rule
  Sufficeth them, the simple plan,
  That they should take, who have the power,
    And they should keep who can.                             40

  "A lesson that [5] is quickly learned,
  A signal this which all can see!
  Thus nothing here provokes the strong
    To wanton [6] cruelty.

  "All freakishness [7] of mind is checked;                   45
  He tamed, who foolishly aspires;
  While to the measure of his might [8]
    Each fashions his desires. [9]

  "All kinds, and creatures, stand and fall
  By strength of prowess or of wit:                           50
  'Tis God's appointment who must sway,
    And who is to submit.

  "Since, then, the rule of right is plain, [10]
  And longest life is but a day;
  To have my ends, maintain my rights,                        55
    I'll take the shortest way."

  And thus among these rocks he lived,
  Through summer heat and winter snow: [11]
  The Eagle, he was lord above,
    And Rob was lord below.                                   60

  So was it--_would_, at least, have been
  But through untowardness of fate;
  For Polity was then too strong--
    He came an age too late;

  Or shall we say an age too soon?                            65
  For, were the bold Man living _now_,
  How might he flourish in his pride,
    With buds on every bough!

  Then rents and factors, rights of chase,
  Sheriffs, and lairds and their domains, [12]                70
  Would all have seemed but paltry things,
    Not worth a moment's pains.

  Rob Roy had never lingered here,
  To these few meagre Vales confined;
  But thought how wide the world, the times                   75
    How fairly to his mind!

  And to his Sword he would have said,
  "Do Thou my sovereign will enact
  From land to land through half the earth!
    Judge thou of law and fact!                               80

  "'Tis fit that we should do our part,
  Becoming, that mankind should learn
  That we are not to be surpassed
    In fatherly concern.

  "Of old things all are over old,                            85
  Of good things none are good enough:--
  We'll show that we can help to frame
    A world of other stuff.

  "I, too, will have my kings that take
  From me the sign of life and death:                         90
  Kingdoms shall shift about, like clouds,
    Obedient to my breath."

  And, if the word had been fulfilled,
  As _might_ have been, then, thought of joy!
  France would have had her present Boast,                    95
    And we our own [13] Rob Roy!

  Oh! say not so; compare them not;
  I would not wrong thee, Champion brave!
  Would wrong thee nowhere; least of all
    Here standing by thy grave.                              100

  For Thou, although with some wild thoughts
  Wild Chieftain of a savage Clan!
  Hadst this to boast of; thou didst love
    The _liberty_ of man.

  And, had it been thy lot to live                           105
  With us who now behold the light,
  Thou would'st have nobly stirred thyself,
    And battled for the Right.

  For thou wert still [14] the poor man's stay,
  The poor man's heart, the poor man's hand;                 110
  And all the oppressed, who wanted strength,
    Had thine at their command. [15]

  Bear witness many a pensive sigh
  Of thoughtful Herdsman when he strays
  Alone upon Loch Veol's heights,                            115
    And by Loch Lomond's braes!

  And, far and near, through vale and hill,
  Are faces that attest the same;
  The proud heart flashing through the eyes, [16]
    At sound of ROB ROY'S name.                              120


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  And Scotland boasts of one as good,
  She has her own Rob Roy.        1803. D.W.]


[Variant 2:

1807.

  ... Outlaw ...      1803. D.W.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  ... daring ...      1803. D.W.]


[Variant 4:

1807.

Stanzas 3 and 4 are thus combined by D.W., and also in a printed (not
published) version, given in a copy of the 1807 edition.

  Yet Robin was as wise as brave,
  As wise in thought as bold in deed,
  For in the principles of things
    He sought his moral creed.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  ... which ...      1807.]


[Variant 6:

1807.

  ... tyrannous ...      1803. D. W.]


[Variant 7:

1807.

  And freakishness ...      1803. D. W.]


[Variant 8:

1807.

  ... their ...      MS.]


[Variant 9:

1807.

  All fashion their desires.      1803. D. W.]


[Variant 10:

1815.

  "Since then," said Robin, "right is plain,      1807.]


[Variant 11:

1827.

  Through summer's heat and winter's snow:      1807.]


[Variant 12:

1807.

  The Rents and Land-marks, Rights of Chase,
  Sheriffs and Factors, Lairds and Thanes,      1803. D. W.

  Sheriffs and Factors, rights of chase,
  Their Lairds, and their domains,              MS.]


[Variant 13:

1827.

  ... our brave ...      1807.]


[Variant 14:

1815.

  For Robin was ...    1807.]


[Variant 15:

1815.

  Had Robin's to command.    1807.]


[Variant 16:

1827.

  Kindling with instantaneous joy         1803. D.W.

  And kindle, like a fire new stirr'd,    1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The people of the neighbourhood of Loch Ketterine, in order
to prove the extraordinary length of their Hero's arm, tell you that "he
could garter his Tartan Stockings below the knee when standing upright."
According to their account he was a tremendous Swordsman; after having
sought all occasions of proving his prowess, he was never conquered but
once, and this not till he was an Old Man.--W. W. 1807.]


In Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections' of the Scotch Tour the following
occurs:

  "August 27, 1803.--We mentioned Rob Roy, and the eyes of all
  glistened; even the lady of the house, who was very diffident, and no
  great talker, exclaimed, 'He was a good man, Rob Roy! he had been dead
  only about eighty years, had lived in the next farm, which belonged to
  him, and there his bones were laid.' He was a famous swordsman. Having
  an arm much longer than other men, he had a greater command with his
  sword. As a proof of the length of his arm, they told us that he could
  garter his tartan stockings below the knee without stooping, and added
  a dozen different stories of single combats, which he had fought, all
  in perfect good humour, merely to prove his prowess. I daresay they
  had stories of this kind which would hardly have been exhausted in the
  long evenings of a whole December week, Rob Roy being as famous here
  as even Robin Hood was in the forest of Sherwood; _he_ also robbed
  from the rich, giving to the poor, and defending them from oppression.
  They tell of his confining the factor of the Duke of Montrose in one
  of the islands of Loch Ketterine, after having taken his money from
  him--the Duke's rents--in open day, while they were sitting at table.
  He was a formidable enemy of the Duke, but being a small laird against
  a greater, was overcome at last, and forced to resign all his lands on
  the Braes of Loch Lomond, including the caves which we visited, on
  account of the money he had taken from the Duke and could not repay."

September 12:

  "Descended into Glengyle, above Loch Ketterine, and passed through Mr.
  Macfarlane's grounds, that is, through the whole of the glen, where
  there was now no house left but his. We stopped at his door to inquire
  after the family, though with little hope of finding them at home,
  having seen a large company at work in a hay-field, whom we
  conjectured to be his whole household, as it proved, except a
  servant-maid who answered our enquiries. We had sent the ferryman
  forward from the head of the glen to bring the boat round from the
  place where he left it to the other side of the lake. Passed the same
  farm-house we had such good reason to remember, and went up to the
  burying-ground that stood so sweetly near the water-side. The ferryman
  had told us that Rob Roy's grave was there, so we could not pass on
  without going up to the spot. There were several tombstones, but the
  inscriptions were either worn-out or unintelligible to us, and the
  place choked up with nettles and brambles. You will remember the
  description I have given of the spot. I have nothing here to add,
  except the following poem which it suggested to William."

Rob Roy was buried at the Kirkton of Balquhidder, near the outlet of
Loch Voil in Perthshire. There are three sculptured stones in the rude
burial-place of the Macgregors, at the eastern end of the old church.
The one with the long claymore marks the resting-place of Rob Roy's
wife; the one opposite on the other side is the tomb of his eldest son;
and the central stone, more elaborately carved, marks the grave of the
hero himself.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





SONNET COMPOSED AT----CASTLE


Composed September 18, 1803.--Published 1807


[The castle here mentioned was Nidpath near Peebles. The person alluded
to was the then Duke of Queensbury. The fact was told to me by Walter
Scott.--I. F.]

In 1815 and 1820 this was one of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets."--Ed.




  Degenerate Douglas! oh, the unworthy Lord!
  Whom mere despite of heart could so far please, [1]
  And love of havoc, (for with such disease
  Fame taxes him,) that he could send forth word
  To level with the dust a noble horde,                            5
  A brotherhood of venerable Trees,
  Leaving an ancient dome, and towers like these,
  Beggared and outraged!--Many hearts deplored
  The fate of those old Trees; and oft with pain
  The traveller, at this day, will stop and gaze                  10
  On wrongs, which Nature scarcely seems to heed:
  For sheltered places, bosoms, nooks, and bays,
  And the pure mountains, and the gentle Tweed,
  And the green silent pastures, yet remain.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  Now as I live, I pity that great Lord,
  Whom pure despite ...

                           MS. letter to Sir Walter Scott. Oct. 1803.

  Ill wishes shall attend the unworthy Lord      MS.]



  "Sunday, September 18th.--After breakfast walked up the river to
  Neidpath Castle, about a mile and a half from the town. The castle
  stands upon a green hill, over-looking the Tweed, a strong
  square-towered edifice, neglected and desolate, though not in ruin,
  the garden overgrown with grass, and the high walls that fenced it
  broken down. The Tweed winds between green steeps, upon which, and
  close to the river side, large flocks of sheep pasturing; higher still
  are the grey mountains; but I need not describe the scene, for William
  has done it better than I could do in a sonnet which he wrote the same
  day; the five last lines, at least, of his poem will impart to you
  more of the feeling of the place than it would be possible for me to
  do."

(Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland'.)
Writing to Sir Walter Scott (October 16, 1803), Wordsworth enclosed a
copy of this sonnet, with the variation of text which has been quoted.
Lockhart tells us

  "in that original shape Scott always recited it, and few lines in the
  language were more frequently in his mouth."

Compare Burns' 'Verses on the destruction of the Woods near Drumlanrig',
which refer to the same subject.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





YARROW UNVISITED


Composed 1803.--Published 1807


See the various Poems the scene of which is laid upon the Banks of the
Yarrow; in particular, the exquisite Ballad of Hamilton, beginning:

  "Busk ye, busk ye, my bonny, bonny Bride,
  Busk ye, busk ye, my winsome Marrow!"

W. W. 1807.


One of the "Poems of the Imagination" in 1815 and 1820.--Ed.




  From Stirling castle we had seen
  The mazy Forth unravelled;
  Had trod the banks of Clyde, and Tay,
  And with the Tweed had travelled;
  And when we came to Clovenford,                           5
  Then said my "_winsome Marrow_,"
  "Whate'er betide, we'll turn aside,
  And see the Braes of Yarrow."

  "Let Yarrow folk, _frae_ Selkirk town,
  Who have been buying, selling,                           10
  Go back to Yarrow, 'tis their own;
  Each maiden to her dwelling!
  On Yarrow's banks let herons feed,
  Hares couch, and rabbits burrow!
  But we will downward [1] with the Tweed,                 15
  Nor turn aside to Yarrow.

  "There's Galla Water, Leader Haughs,
  Both lying right before us;
  And Dryborough, where with chiming Tweed
  The lintwhites sing in chorus;                           20
  There's pleasant Tiviot-dale, a land
  Made blithe with plough and harrow:
  Why throw away a needful day
  To go in search of Yarrow?

  "What's Yarrow but a river bare,                         25
  That glides the dark hills under?
  There are a thousand such elsewhere
  As worthy of your wonder."
--Strange words they seemed of slight and scorn;
  My True-love sighed for sorrow;                          30
  And looked me in the face, to think
  I thus could speak of Yarrow!

  "Oh! green," said I, "are Yarrow's holms,
  And sweet is Yarrow flowing!
  Fair hangs the apple frae the rock, [A]                  35
  But we will leave it growing.
  O'er hilly path, and open Strath,
  We'll wander Scotland thorough;
  But, though so near, we will not turn
  Into the dale of Yarrow.                                 40

  "Let beeves and home-bred kine partake
  The sweets of Burn-mill meadow;
  The swan on still St. Mary's Lake
  Float double, swan and shadow! [B]
  We will not see them; will not go,                       45
  To-day, nor yet to-morrow;
  Enough if in our hearts we know
  There's such a place as Yarrow.

  "Be Yarrow stream unseen, unknown!
  It must, or we shall rue it:                             50
  We have a vision of our own;
  Ah! why should we undo it?
  The treasured dreams of times long past,
  We'll keep them, winsome Marrow!
  For when we're there, although 'tis fair,                55
  'Twill be another Yarrow.

  "If Care with freezing years should come,
  And wandering seem but folly,--
  Should we be loth to stir from home,
  And yet be melancholy;                                   60
  Should life be dull, and spirits low,
  'Twill soothe us in our sorrow,
  That earth has something yet to show,
  The bonny holms of Yarrow!"


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1832.

  ... downwards ...    1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See Hamilton's Ballad as above.--W. W. 1807.]


[Footnote B: In his "Recollections of Wordsworth," Aubrey de Vere
reports a conversation, in which the poet said to him,

  "Scott misquoted in one of his novels my lines on 'Yarrow', He makes
  me write,

    'The swans on sweet St. Mary's Lake
    Float double, swans and shadow;'

  but I wrote,

    'The _swan_ on _still_ St. Mary's Lake.'

  Never could I have written 'swans' in the plural. The scene when I saw
  it, with its still and dim lake, under the dusky hills, was one of
  utter loneliness: there was _one_ swan, and one only, stemming the
  water, and the pathetic loneliness of the region gave importance to
  the one companion of that swan, its own white image in the water. It
  was for that reason that I recorded the Swan and the Shadow. Had there
  been many swans and many shadows, they would have implied nothing as
  regards the character of the place; and I should have said nothing
  about them."

See his 'Essays, chiefly on Poetry', vol. ii. p. 277.

Wordsworth wrote to his friend, Walter Scott, to thank him for a copy of
'The Lay of the Last Minstrel', and in return sent a copy of these
stanzas, 'Yarrow Unvisited'. Scott replied gratefully on the 16th March
1805, and said,

  "... I by no means admit your apology, however ingeniously and
  artfully stated, for not visiting the bonny holms of Yarrow, and
  certainly will not rest till I have prevailed upon you to compare the
  ideal with the real stream."

Wordsworth had asked him if he could suggest any name more true to the
place than Burnmill, in the line, "The sweets of Burn-mill meadow."
Scott replied:

  "We have Broad-meadow upon Yarrow, which with the addition of green or
  fair or any other epithet of one syllable, will give truth to the
  locality, and supply the place of Burnmill meadow, which we have not.
  ... I like your swan upon St. Mary's Lake. How came you to know that
  it is actually frequented by that superb bird?"

(See 'Familiar Letters of Sir Walter Scott', vol. i. pp. 28, 29.)--Ed.]



  "September 18, 1803.--We left the Tweed when we were within about a
  mile and a half or two miles of Clovenford, where we were to lodge.
  Turned up the side of a hill, and went along sheep-grounds till we
  reached the spot--a single stone house, without a tree near it or to
  be seen from it. On our mentioning Mr. Scott's name, the woman of the
  house showed us all possible civility, but her slowness was really
  amusing. I should suppose it a house little frequented, for there is
  no appearance of an inn. Mr. Scott, who she told me was a very clever
  gentleman, 'goes there in the fishing season;' but indeed Mr. Scott is
  respected everywhere; I believe that by favour of his name one might
  be hospitably entertained throughout all the borders of Scotland. We
  dined and drank tea--did not walk out, for there was no temptation; a
  confined barren prospect from the window.

  "At Clovenford, being so near to the Yarrow, we could not but think of
  the possibility of going thither, but came to the conclusion of
  reserving the pleasure for some future time, in consequence of which,
  after our return, William wrote the poem which I shall here
  transcribe."

(From Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland',
1803.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE MATRON OF JEDBOROUGH AND HER HUSBAND


Composed between 1803 and 1805.--Published 1807


At Jedborough we went into private Lodgings for a few days; and the
following Verses were called forth by the character, and domestic
situation, of our Hostess.--W. W. 1807.

One of the "Poems referring to the Period of Old Age" in 1815 and
1820.--Ed.




  Age! twine thy brows with fresh spring flowers,
  And call a train of laughing Hours;
  And bid them dance, and bid them sing;
  And thou, too, mingle in the ring!
  Take to thy heart a new delight;                              5
  If not, make merry in despite
  That [1] there is One who scorns thy power:--
  But dance! for under Jedborough Tower,
  A Matron dwells who, though she bears
  The weight of more than seventy years,                       10
  Lives in the light of youthful glee, [2]
  And she will dance and sing with thee.

    Nay! start not at that Figure--there!
  Him who is rooted to his chair!
  Look at him--look again! for he                              15
  Hath long been of thy family.
  With legs that move not, if they can,
  And useless arms, a trunk of man,
  He sits, and with a vacant eye;
  A sight to make a stranger sigh!                             20
  Deaf, drooping, that is now his doom:
  His world is in this single room:
  Is this a place for mirthful cheer? [3]
  Can merry-making enter here? [A]

    The joyous Woman is the Mate                               25
  Of him in that forlorn estate!
  He breathes a subterraneous damp;
  But bright as Vesper shines her lamp:
  He is as mute as Jedborough Tower:
  She jocund as it was of yore,                                30
  With all its bravery on; in times
  When all alive with merry chimes,
  Upon a sun-bright morn of May,
  It roused the Vale to holiday.

    I praise thee, Matron! and thy due                         35
  Is praise, heroic praise, and true!
  With admiration I behold
  Thy gladness unsubdued and bold:
  Thy looks, thy gestures, all present
  The picture of a life well spent:                            40
  This do I see; and something more;
  A strength unthought of heretofore!
  Delighted am I for thy sake;
  And yet a higher joy partake:
  Our Human-nature throws away                                 45
  Its second twilight, and looks gay;
  A land of promise and of pride
  Unfolding, wide as life is wide.

    Ah! see her helpless Charge! enclosed
  Within himself as seems, composed;                           50
  To fear of loss, and hope of gain,
  The strife of happiness and pain,
  Utterly dead! yet in the guise
  Of little infants, when their eyes
  Begin to follow to and fro                                   55
  The persons that before them go,
  He tracks her motions, quick or slow.
  Her buoyant spirit can prevail
  Where common cheerfulness would fail;
  She strikes upon him with the heat                           60
  Of July suns; he feels it sweet;
  An animal delight though dim!
  'Tis all that now remains for him!

    The more I looked, I wondered more--
  And, while I scanned them o'er and o'er, [4]                 65
  Some inward trouble suddenly
  Broke from the Matron's strong black eye--[5]
  A remnant of uneasy light,
  A flash of something over-bright![B]
  Nor long this mystery did detain                             70
  My thoughts;--she told in pensive strain [6]
  That she had borne a heavy yoke,
  Been stricken by a twofold stroke;
  Ill health of body; and had pined
  Beneath worse ailments of the mind.                          75

    So be it!--but let praise ascend
  To Him who is our lord and friend!
  Who from disease and suffering
  [7] Hath called for thee a second spring;
  Repaid thee for that sore distress                           80
  By no untimely joyousness;
  Which makes of thine a blissful state;
  And cheers thy melancholy Mate!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  For ...     1807.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  ... under Jedborough Tower
  There liveth in the prime of glee,
  A Woman, whose years are seventy-three,
  And She ...                                 1807.

  There lives a woman of seventy-three,
  And she will dance and sing with thee,      MS.

  A Matron dwells, who though she bears
  Our mortal complement of years,
  Lives in the light of youthful glee,        1827.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  ... for mirth and cheer?      1807.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  I look'd, I scann'd her o'er and o'er;
  The more I look'd I wonder'd more:       1807.]


[Variant 5:

1837.

  When suddenly I seem'd to espy
  A trouble in her strong black eye;      1807.

  A moment gave me to espy
  A trouble . . .                         1827.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  And soon she made this matter plain;
  And told me, in a thoughtful strain,      1807.]


[Variant 7:

  As bad almost as Life can bring,      Added in MS.]



       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Tennyson's 'Deserted House', stanza iv.:

  'Come away: no more of mirth
  Is here, or merry-making sound.'

Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare stanza xiii. of 'Resolution and Independence', p.
318.--Ed.]



Sept. 20, 1803.

  "We were received with hearty welcome by a good woman, who, though
  above seventy years old, moved about as briskly as if she was only
  seventeen. Those parts of the house which we were to occupy were neat
  and clean; she showed me every corner, and, before I had been ten
  minutes in the house, opened her very drawers that I might see what a
  stock of linen she had; then asked how long we should stay, and said
  she wished we were come for three months. She was a most remarkable
  person; the alacrity with which she ran up-stairs when we rung the
  bell, and guessed at, and strove to prevent, our wants was surprising;
  she had a quick eye, and keen strong features, and a joyousness in her
  motions, like what used to be in old Molly when she was particularly
  elated. I found afterwards that she had been subject to fits of
  dejection and ill-health: we then conjectured that her overflowing
  gaiety and strength might in part be attributed to the same cause as
  her former dejection. Her husband was deaf and infirm, and sate in a
  chair with scarcely the power to move a limb--an affecting contrast!
  The old woman said they had been a very hard-working pair; they had
  wrought like slaves at their trade--her husband had been a currier;
  and she told me how they had portioned off their daughters with money,
  and each a feather bed, and that in their old age they had laid out
  the little they could spare in building and furnishing that house, and
  she added with pride that she had lived in her youth in the family of
  Lady Egerton, who was no high lady, and now was in the habit of coming
  to her house whenever she was at Jedburgh, and a hundred other things;
  for when she once began with Lady Egerton, she did not know how to
  stop, nor did I wish it, for she was very entertaining. Mr. Scott sat
  with us an hour or two, and repeated a part of the 'Lay of the Last
  Minstrel'. When he was gone our hostess came to see if we wanted
  anything, and to wish us good-night. On all occasions her manners were
  governed by the same spirit: there was no withdrawing one's attention
  from her. We were so much interested that William, long afterwards,
  thought it worth while to express in verse the sensations which she
  had excited, and which then remained as vividly in his mind as at the
  moment when we lost sight of Jedburgh."

(From Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland',
1803.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"FLY, SOME KIND HARBINGER, TO GRASMERE-DALE" [A]


Composed September 25, 1803.--Published 1815


[This was actually composed the last day of our tour between Dalston and
Grasmere.--I.F.]

One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets" in 1815 and 1820.--Ed.




  Fly, some kind Harbinger, to Grasmere-dale! [1]
  Say that we come, and come by this day's light;
  Fly upon swiftest wing round field and height, [2]
  But chiefly let one Cottage hear the tale;
  There let a mystery of joy prevail,                         5
  The kitten frolic, like a gamesome sprite, [3]
  And Rover whine, as at a second sight
  Of near-approaching good that shall not fail:
  And from that Infant's face let joy appear;
  Yea, let our Mary's one companion child--10
  That hath her six weeks' solitude beguiled
  With intimations manifold and dear,
  While we have wandered over wood and wild--
  Smile on his Mother now with bolder cheer.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  Fly, some kind Spirit, fly to Grasmere Vale!      1815.

  ... dale,                                         1827.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  Glad tidings!--spread them over field and height;      1815.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  The Kitten frolic with unruly might,           1815.

  The happy Kitten bound with frolic might,      1827.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In the editions of 1815 and 1820, this poem bore the title,
'On approaching Home, after a Tour in Scotland, 1803',--Ed.]



  "Sunday, September 25, 1803.--A beautiful autumnal day. Breakfasted at
  a public-house by the road-side; dined at Threlkeld; arrived at home
  between eight and nine o'clock, where we found Mary in perfect health,
  Joanna Hutchinson with her, and little John asleep in the
  clothes-basket by the fire."

(From Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland',
1803.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE BLIND HIGHLAND BOY

A TALE TOLD BY THE FIRE-SIDE, AFTER RETURNING TO THE VALE OF GRASMERE[A]


Date of composition uncertain.--Published 1807


[The story was told me by George Mackereth, for many years parish-clerk
of Grasmere. He had been an eye-witness of the occurrence. The vessel in
reality was a washing-tub, which the little fellow had met with on the
shores of the Loch.--I.F.]

One of the "Poems referring to the Period of Childhood" in 1815 and
1820.--Ed.




  Now we are tired of boisterous joy,
  Have [1] romped enough, my little Boy!
  Jane hangs her head upon my breast,
  And you shall bring your stool and rest;
    This corner is your own.                                   5

  There! take your seat, and let me see
  That [2] you can listen quietly:
  And, as I promised, I will tell [3]
  That strange adventure which befel
    A poor blind Highland Boy.                                10

  A _Highland_ Boy!--why call him so?
  Because, my Darlings, ye must know
  That, under hills which rise like towers, [4]
  Far higher hills than these of ours!
    He from his birth had lived.                              15

  He ne'er had seen one earthly sight
  The sun, the day; the stars, the night;
  Or tree, or butterfly, or flower,
  Or fish in stream, or bird in bower,
    Or woman, man, or child.                                  20

  And yet he neither drooped nor pined,
  Nor had a melancholy mind;
  For God took pity on the Boy,
  And was his friend; and gave him joy
    Of which we nothing know.                                 25

  His Mother, too, no doubt, above
  Her other children him did love:
  For, was she here, or was she there,
  She thought of him with constant care,
    And more than mother's love.                              30

  And proud she was of heart, when clad
  In crimson stockings, tartan plaid,
  And bonnet with a feather gay,
  To Kirk he on the sabbath day
    Went hand in hand with her.                               35

  A dog too, had he; not for need,
  But one to play with and to feed;
  Which would [5] have led him, if bereft
  Of company or friends, and left
    Without a better guide.                                   40

  And then the bagpipes he could blow--
  And thus from house to house would go;
  And all were pleased to hear and see,
  For none made sweeter melody
    Than did the poor blind Boy.                              45

  Yet he had many a restless dream;
  Both when he heard the eagles scream,
  And when he heard the torrents roar,
  And heard the water beat the shore
    Near which their cottage stood.                           50

  Beside a lake their cottage stood,
  Not small like ours, a peaceful flood;
  But one of mighty size, and strange;
  That, rough or smooth, is full of change,
    And stirring in its bed.                                  55

  For to this lake, by night and day,
  The great Sea-water finds its way
  Through long, long windings of the hills
  And drinks up all the pretty [B] rills
    And rivers large and strong: [C]                          60

  Then hurries back the road it came--
  Returns, on errand still the same;
  This did it when the earth was new;
  And this for evermore will do,
    As long as earth shall last.                              65

  And, with the coming of the tide,
  Come boats and ships that safely [6] ride
  Between the woods and lofty rocks;
  And to the shepherds with their flocks
  Bring tales of distant lands.                               70

  And of those tales, whate'er they were,
  The blind Boy always had his share;
  Whether of mighty towns, or vales
  With warmer suns and softer gales,
      Or wonders of the Deep.                                 75

  Yet more it pleased him, more it stirred,
  When from the water-side he heard
  The shouting, and the jolly cheers;
  The bustle of the mariners
      In stillness or in storm.                               80

  But what do his desires avail?
  For He must never handle sail;
  Nor mount the mast, nor row, nor float
  In sailor's ship, or fisher's boat,
      Upon the rocking waves.                                 85

  His Mother often thought, and said,
  What sin would be upon her head
  If she should suffer this: "My Son,
  Whate'er you do, leave this undone;
      The danger is so great."                                90

  Thus lived he by Loch-Leven's side
  Still sounding with the sounding tide,
  And heard the billows leap and dance,
  Without a shadow of mischance,
      Till he was ten years old.                              95

  When one day (and now mark me well,
  Ye [7] soon shall know how this befell)
  He in a vessel of his own,
  On the swift flood is hurrying down,
      Down to the mighty Sea. [8]                            100

  In such a vessel never more
  May human creature leave the Shore! [9]
  If this or that way he should stir,
  Woe to the poor blind Mariner!
    For death will be his doom.                              105
  [10]
  But say what bears him?--Ye have seen
  The Indian's bow, his arrows keen,
  Rare beasts, and birds with plumage bright;
  Gifts which, for wonder or delight,
    Are brought in ships from far. [11]                      110

  [D] Such gifts had those seafaring men
  Spread round that haven in the glen;
  Each hut, perchance, might have its own;
  And to the Boy they all were known--
     He knew and prized them all.                            115

  The rarest was a Turtle-shell
  Which he, poor Child, had studied well;
  A shell of ample size, and light
  As the pearly car of Amphitrite,
    That sportive dolphins drew. [12]                        120

  And, as a Coracle that braves
  On Vaga's breast the fretful waves,
  This shell upon the deep would swim,
  And gaily lift its fearless brim
    Above the tossing surge. [13]                            125

  And this the little blind Boy knew:
  And he a story strange yet true
  Had heard, how in a shell like this
  An English Boy, O thought of bliss!
    Had stoutly launched from shore;                         130

  Launched from the margin of a bay
  Among the Indian isles, where lay
  His father's ship, and had sailed far--
  To join that gallant ship of war,
    In his delightful shell.                                 135

  Our Highland Boy oft visited
  'The house that [14] held this prize; and, led
  By choice or chance, did thither come
  One day when no one was at home,
    And found the door unbarred.                             140

  While there he sate, alone and blind,
  That story flashed upon his mind;--
  A bold thought roused him, and he took
  The shell from out its secret nook,
     And bore it on his head. [15]                           145

  He launched his vessel,--and in pride
  Of spirit, from Loch-Leven's side,
  Stepped into it--his thoughts all free
  As the light breezes that with glee
     Sang through the adventurer's hair. [16]                150

  A while he stood upon his feet;
  He felt the motion--took his seat;
  Still better pleased as more and more
  The tide retreated from the shore,
     And sucked, and sucked him in. [17]                     155

  And there he is in face of Heaven.
  How rapidly the Child is driven!
  The fourth part of a mile, I ween,
  He thus had gone, ere he was seen
     By any human eye.                                       160

  But when he was first seen, oh me
  What shrieking and what misery!
  For many saw; among the rest
  His Mother, she who loved him best,
    She saw her poor blind Boy.                              165

  But for the child, the sightless Boy,
  It is the triumph of his joy!
  The bravest traveller in balloon,
  Mounting as if to reach the moon,
    Was never half so blessed.                               170

  And let him, let him go his way,
  Alone, and innocent, and gay!
  For, if good Angels love to wait
  On the forlorn unfortunate,
    This Child will take no harm.                            175

  But now the passionate lament,
  Which from the crowd on shore was sent,
  The cries which broke from old and young
  In Gaelic, or the English tongue,
    Are stifled--all is still.                               180

  And quickly with a silent crew
  A boat is ready to pursue;
  And from the shore their course they take,
  And swiftly down the running lake
    They follow the blind Boy.                               185

  But soon they move with softer pace;
  So have ye seen the fowler chase
  On Grasmere's clear unruffled breast
  A youngling of the wild-duck's nest
    With deftly-lifted oar;                                  190

  Or as the wily sailors crept
  To seize (while on the Deep it slept)
  The hapless creature which did dwell
  Erewhile within the dancing shell,
    They steal upon their prey. [18]                         195

  With sound the least that can be made,
  They follow, more and more afraid,
  More cautious as they draw more near;
  But in his darkness he can hear,
    And guesses their intent.                                200

  "_Lei-gha--Lei-gha_"--he then cried out,
  "_Lei-gha--Lei-gha_"--with eager shout; [19]
  Thus did he cry, and thus did pray,
  And what he meant was, "Keep away,
    And leave me to myself!" [E]                             205

  Alas! and when he felt their hands--
  You've often heard [20] of magic wands,
  That with a motion overthrow
  A palace of the proudest show,
    Or melt it into air:                                     210

  So all his dreams--that inward light
  With which his soul had shone so bright--
  All vanished;--'twas a heartfelt cross
  To him, a heavy, bitter loss,
    As he had ever known.                                    215

  But hark! a gratulating voice,
  With which the very hills rejoice:
  'Tis from the crowd, who tremblingly
  Have [21] watched the event, and now can see
    That he is safe at last.                                 220

  And then, when he was brought to land,
  Full sure they were a happy band,
  Which, gathering round, did on the banks
  Of that great Water give God thanks,
    And welcomed the poor Child.                             225

  And in the general joy of heart
  The blind Boy's little dog took part;
  He leapt about, and oft did kiss
  His master's hands in sign of bliss,
    With sound like lamentation.                             230

  But most of all, his Mother dear,
  She who had fainted with her fear,
  Rejoiced when waking she espies
  The Child; when she can trust her eyes,
    And touches the blind Boy.                               235

  She led him home, and wept amain,
  When he was in the house again:
  Tears flowed in torrents from her eyes;
  She kissed him--how could she chastise? [22]
    She was too happy far.                                   240

  Thus, after he had fondly braved
  The perilous Deep, the Boy was saved;
  And, though his fancies had been wild,
  Yet he was pleased and reconciled
    To live in peace on shore.                               245

  And in the lonely Highland dell
  Still do they keep the Turtle-shell;
  And long the story will repeat
  Of the blind Boy's adventurous feat,
    And how he was preserved. [23]                           250


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  We've ...      1807.]


[Variant 2:

1807.

  How ...      MS.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  Aye, willingly, and what is more
  One which you never heard before,
  True story this which I shall tell        MS.]


[Variant 4:

1837.

  In land where many a mountain towers,       1807.]


[Variant 5:

1807.

  ... could ...        MS.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  ... sweetly ...      1807.]


[Variant 7:

1815.

  You ...        1807.]


[Variant 8:

1837.

  He's in a vessel of his own,
  On the swift water hurrying down
  Towards the mighty Sea.                1807.

  He in a vessel of his own,
  On the swift flood is hurrying down    1827.

  Towards the great, great Sea.          MS.]


[Variant 9:

1815.

  ... ne'er before
  Did human Creature ...    1807.]


[Variant 10: The following stanza was only in the edition of 1807:

  Strong is the current; but be mild,
  Ye waves, and spare the helpless Child!
  If ye in anger fret or chafe,
  A Bee-hive would be ship as safe
    As that in which he sails.]


[Variant 11:

1815.

  But say, what was it? Thought of fear!
  Well may ye tremble when ye hear!
--A Household Tub, like one of those,
  Which women use to wash their clothes,
    This carried the blind Boy.    1807.]


[Variant 12:

1820.

  And one, the rarest, was a Shell
  Which he, poor Child, had studied well;
  The Shell of a green Turtle, thin
  And hollow;--you might sit therein.
    It was so wide and deep.    1815.]


[Variant 13:

1820.

  'Twas even the largest of its kind,
  Large, thin, and light as birch-tree rind;
  So light a Shell that it would swim,
  And gaily lift its fearless brim
    Above the tossing waves.    1815.]


[Variant 14:

1837.

  ... which ...    1815.]


[Variant 15:

1827.

  ... in his arms.    1815.]


[Variant 16:

1827.

  Close to the water he had found
  This Vessel, push'd it from dry ground,
  Went into it; and, without dread,
  Following the fancies in his head,
     He paddled up and down.              1807.

  And with the happy burthen hied,
  And pushed it from Loch Levin's side,--
  Stepped into it; and, without dread,    1815.]


[Variant 17:

1827.

  And dallied thus, till from the shore
  The tide retreating more and more
     Had suck'd, and suck'd him in.    1807.]


[Variant 18: The two previous stanzas were added in the edition of 1815.]


[Variant 19:

1837.

  ... then did he cry
  ... most eagerly;      1807.]


[Variant 20:

1807.

  ... read ...      MS.]


[Variant 21:

1837.

  Had ...      1807.]


[Variant 22:

1832.

  She could not blame him, or chastise;       1807.]


[Variant 23: This stanza was added in the edition of 1815.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The title in the editions of 1807 to 1820 was 'The Blind
Highland Boy. (A Tale told by the Fireside.)'

This poem gave its title to a separate division in the second volume of
the edition of 1807, viz. "The Blind Highland Boy; with other
Poems."--Ed.]


[Footnote B: This reading occurs in all the editions. But Wordsworth,
whose MS. was not specially clear, may have written, or meant to write
"petty," (a much better word), and not perceived the mistake when
revising the sheets. If he really wrote "petty," he may have meant
either small rills (rillets), or used the word as Shakespeare used it,
for "pelting" rills.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare Tennyson's 'In Memoriam', stanza xix.:

  'There twice a day the Severn fills;
    The salt sea-water passes by,
    And hushes half the babbling Wye,
  And makes a silence in the hills, etc.'

Ed.]


[Footnote D: This and the following six stanzas were added in 1815.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: Writing to Walter Scott, from Coleorton, on Jan. 20, 1807,
Wordsworth sent him this stanza of the poem, and asked

  "Could you furnish me, by application to any of your Gaelic friends, a
  phrase in that language which could take its place in the following
  verse of eight syllables, and have the following meaning."

He adds,

  "The above is part of a little poem which I have written on a Highland
  story told me by an eye-witness ..."

This is the nearest clue we have to the date of the composition of the
poem.--Ed.]



It is recorded in Dampier's Voyages that a Boy, the Son of a Captain of
a Man of War, seated himself in a Turtle-shell and floated in it from
the shore to his Father's Ship, which lay at anchor at the distance of
half a mile. Upon the suggestion of a Friend, I have substituted such a
Shell for that less elegant vessel in which my blind voyager did
actually intrust himself to the dangerous current of Loch Levin, as was
related to me by an Eye-witness.--W. W. 1815.

This note varies slightly in later editions.

The Loch Leven referred to is a sea-loch in Argyllshire, into which the
tidal water flows with some force from Loch Linnhe at Ballachulish.

            'By night and day
  The great Sea-water finds its way
  Through long, long windings of the hills.'

The friend referred to in the note of 1815, who urged Wordsworth to give
his blind voyager a Shell, instead of a washing-tub to sail in, was
Coleridge. The original tale of the tub was not more unfortunate than
the lines in praise of Wilkinson's spade, and several of Wordsworth's
friends, notably Charles Lamb and Barren Field, objected to the change.
Lamb wrote to Wordsworth in 1815,

  "I am afraid lest that substitution of a shell (a flat falsification
  of the history) for the household implement, as it stood at first, was
  a kind of tub thrown out to the beast" [_i. e._ the reviewer!] "or
  rather thrown out for him. The tub was a good honest tub in its place,
  and nothing could fairly be said against it. You say you made the
  alteration for the 'friendly reader,' but the 'malicious' will take it
  to himself."

('The Letters of Charles Lamb', edited by Alfred Ainger, vol. i. p.
283.) Wordsworth could not be induced to "undo his work," and go back to
his own original; although he evidently agreed with what Lamb had said
(as is seen in a letter to Barren Field, Oct. 24, 1828).--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





OCTOBER, 1803


Composed October 1803.--Published 1807


Included among the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; renamed in 1845,
"Poems dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  One might believe that natural miseries
  Had blasted France, and made of it a land
  Unfit for men; and that in one great band
  Her sons were bursting forth, to dwell at ease.
  But 'tis a chosen soil, where sun and breeze                   5
  Shed gentle favours: rural works are there,
  And ordinary business without care;
  Spot rich in all things that can soothe and please!
  How piteous then that there should be such dearth
  Of knowledge; that whole myriads should unite                 10
  To work against themselves such fell despite:
  Should come in phrensy and in drunken mirth,
  Impatient to put out the only light
  Of Liberty that yet remains on earth!





       *       *       *       *       *





"THERE IS A BONDAGE WORSE, FAR WORSE, TO BEAR"


Composed possibly in 1803.--Published 1807


Included among the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; renamed in 1845,
"Poems dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  There is a bondage worse, far worse, to bear [1]
  Than his who breathes, by roof, and floor, and wall,
  Pent in, a Tyrant's solitary Thrall:
  'Tis his who walks about in the open air,
  One of a Nation who, henceforth, must wear                      5
  Their fetters in their souls. For who could be,
  Who, even the best, in such condition, free
  From self-reproach, reproach that [2] he must share
  With Human-nature? Never be it ours
  To see the sun how brightly it will shine,                     10
  And know that noble feelings, manly powers,
  Instead of gathering strength, must droop and pine;
  And earth with all her pleasant fruits and flowers
  Fade, and participate in man's decline.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  ... which is worse to bear       1807.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  ... which ...      1807.]





       *       *       *       *       *





OCTOBER, 1803 (#2)


Composed October 1803.--Published 1807


This was one of the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; afterwards called,
"Poems dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  These times strike [1] monied worldlings with dismay:
  Even rich men, brave by nature, taint the air
  With words of apprehension and despair:
  While tens of thousands, thinking on the affray,
  Men unto whom sufficient for the day                              5
  And minds not stinted or unfilled are given,
  Sound, healthy, children of the God of heaven,
  Are cheerful as the rising sun in May.
  What do we gather hence but firmer faith
  That every gift of noble origin                                  10
  Is breathed upon by Hope's perpetual breath;
  That virtue and the faculties within
  Are vital,--and that riches are akin
  To fear, to change, to cowardice, and death?


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  ... touch ...       1807.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"ENGLAND! THE TIME IS COME WHEN THOU SHOULD'ST WEAN"


Composed possibly in 1803.--Published 1807


This was one of the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; afterwards called,
"Poems dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  England! the time is come when thou should'st wean
  Thy heart from its emasculating food;
  The truth should now be better understood;
  Old things have been unsettled; we have seen
  Fair seed-time, better harvest might have been                    5
  But for thy trespasses; and, at this day,
  If for Greece, Egypt, India, Africa,
  Aught good were destined, thou would'st step between.
  England! all nations in this charge agree:
  But worse, more ignorant in love and hate,                       10
  Far--far more abject, is thine Enemy:
  Therefore the wise pray for thee, though the freight
  Of thy offences be a heavy weight:
  Oh grief that Earth's best hopes rest all with Thee!





       *       *       *       *       *





OCTOBER, 1803 (#3)


Composed October 1803.--Published 1807


Included among the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; afterwards called,
"Poems dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  When, looking on the present face of things,
  I see one man, of men the meanest too!
  Raised up to sway the world, to do, undo,
  With mighty Nations for his underlings,
  The great events with which old story rings                      5
  Seem vain and hollow; I find nothing great:
  Nothing is left which I can venerate;
  So that a doubt almost [1] within me springs
  Of Providence, such emptiness at length
  Seems at the heart of all things. But, great God!               10
  I measure back the steps which I have trod;
  And tremble, seeing whence proceeds the strength [2]
  Of such poor Instruments, with thoughts sublime
  I tremble at the sorrow of the time.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1845.

  ... almost a doubt ...      1807.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  ... seeing, as I do, the strength      1807.]



The reference is, of course, to Napoleon.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE MEN OF KENT. OCTOBER, 1803


Composed October 1803.--Published 1807


One of the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; re-named in 1845, "Poems
dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  Vanguard of Liberty, ye men of Kent, [A]
  Ye children of a Soil that doth advance
  Her [1] haughty brow against the coast of France,
  Now is the time to prove your hardiment!
  To France be words of invitation sent!                          5
  They from their fields can see the countenance
  Of your fierce war, may ken the glittering lance
  And hear you shouting forth your brave intent.
  Left single, in bold parley, ye, of yore,
  Did from the Norman win a gallant wreath;                      10
  Confirmed the charters that were yours before;--
  No parleying now! In Britain is one breath;
  We all are with you now from shore to shore:--
  Ye men of Kent, 'tis victory or death!


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  It's ...                               1807.

  It's haughty forehead 'gainst ...      MS.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Michael Drayton's 'Barons' Wars', book i.:

  'Then those of Kent, unconquered of the rest,
  That to this day maintain their ancient right.'

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





IN THE PASS OF KILLICRANKY,

An invasion being expected, October 1803


Composed October 1803.--Published 1807

From 1807 to 1820 this sonnet was one of those "dedicated to Liberty."
In 1827 it was included among the "Memorials of a Tour in Scotland,
1803." From 1807 to 1820 the title was simply October, 1803.--Ed.




  Six thousand veterans practised in war's game,
  Tried men, at Killicranky were arrayed
  Against an equal host that wore the plaid,
  Shepherds and herdsmen.--Like a whirlwind came
  The Highlanders, the slaughter spread like flame;                 5
  And Garry, thundering down his mountain-road,
  Was stopped, and could not breathe beneath the load
  Of the dead bodies.--'Twas a day of shame
  For them whom precept and the pedantry
  Of cold mechanic battle do enslave.                              10
  O for a single hour of that Dundee, [A]
  Who on that day the word of onset gave!
  Like conquest would the Men of England see;
  And her Foes find a like inglorious grave.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See an anecdote related in Mr. Scott's Border Minstrelsy.
--W. W. 1807.

"Oh for an hour of Dundee" was an exclamation of Gordon of Glenbucket at
Sheriffmuir.--Ed.]


The following is from Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections of a Tour made
in Scotland', 1803:

  "Thursday, September 8th.--Before breakfast we walked to the Pass of
  Killicrankie. A very fine scene; the river Garry forcing its way down
  a deep chasm between rocks, at the foot of high rugged hills covered
  with wood, to a great height. The pass did not, however, impress us
  with awe, or a sensation of difficulty or danger, according to our
  expectations; but, the road being at a considerable height on the side
  of the hill, we at first only looked into the dell or chasm. It is
  much grander seen from below, near the river's bed. Everybody knows
  that this Pass is famous in military history. When we were travelling
  in Scotland, an invasion was hourly looked for, and one could not but
  think with some regret of the times when, from the now depopulated
  Highlands forty or fifty thousand men might have been poured down for
  the defence of the country, under such leaders as the Marquis of
  Montrose or the brave man who had so distinguished himself upon the
  ground where we were standing. I will transcribe a sonnet suggested to
  William by this place, and written in Oct. 1803."

Ed.



       *       *       *       *       *



ANTICIPATION. OCTOBER, 1803


Composed October 1803.--Published 1807 [A]


Included among the "Sonnets dedicated to Liberty"; re-named in 1845,
"Poems dedicated to National Independence and Liberty."--Ed.




  Shout, for a mighty Victory is won!
  On British ground the Invaders are laid low;
  The breath of Heaven has drifted them like snow,
  And left them lying in the silent sun,
  Never to rise again!--the work is done.                          5
  Come forth, ye old men, now in peaceful show
  And greet your sons! drums beat and trumpets blow!
  Make merry, wives! ye little children, stun
  Your grandame's ears with pleasure of your noise! [1]
  Clap, infants, clap your hands! Divine must be                  10
  That triumph, when the very worst, the pain,
  And even the prospect of our brethren slain, [2]
  Hath something in it which the heart enjoys:--
  In glory will they sleep and endless sanctity. [3]


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  ... with transports of your own.       C.

  ... with transport of your noise!      1838.

The edition of 1840 returns to the text of 1807.]


[Variant 2:

1807.

  The loss and e'en the prospect of the slain,      MS. 1803.

And in 'The Poetical Register', 1803.

  And prospect of our Brethren to be slain,         MS. 1803.]


[Variant 3:

1807.

  True glory, everlasting sanctity.        MS. 1803.

And in 'The Poetical Register', 1803.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: _i. e._ in the edition of 1807, but this sonnet was
previously printed in 1803 in 'The Poetical Register', vol. iii. p. 340,
in the 'Anti-Gallican' (1804), and in the 'Poetical Repository'
(1805).--Ed.]


This sonnet, as the title indicates, does not refer to an actual
victory; because, since the Norman conquest, no "Invaders" have ever set
foot "on British ground." It was written--like the two preceding
sonnets, and the one that follows it--"in anticipation" of Napoleon's
project for the invasion of England being actually carried out; a
project never realised. The assembling of the immense French army
destined for this purpose--one of the finest brought together since the
days of the Roman legions--between the mouths of the Seine and the
Texel, roused the spirit of English patriotism as it had never been
roused before. Three hundred thousand volunteers were enlisted in Great
Britain by the 10th of August 1803;

  "all the male population of the kingdom from seventeen years of age to
  fifty-five were divided into classes to be successively armed and
  exercised" (Dyer).

The story of the failure of Napoleon's scheme is too well known to be
repeated in this note. Wordsworth seems to have written his sonnet in
anticipation of what he believed would have been the inevitable issue of
events, had the French army actually landed on British soil.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





LINES ON THE EXPECTED INVASION

1803


Composed 1803.--Published 1842


Included among the "Poems dedicated to National Independence and
Liberty."--Ed.




  Come ye--who, if (which Heaven avert!) the Land
  Were with herself at strife, would take your stand,
  Like gallant Falkland, by the Monarch's side,
  And, like Montrose, make Loyalty your pride--
  Come ye--who, not less zealous, might display                   5
  Banners at enmity with regal sway,
  And, like the Pyms and Miltons of that day,
  Think that a State would live in sounder health
  If Kingship bowed its head to Commonwealth--
  Ye too--whom no discreditable fear                             10
  Would keep, perhaps with many a fruitless tear,
  Uncertain what to choose and how to steer--
  And ye--who might mistake for sober sense
  And wise reserve the plea of indolence--
  Come ye--whate'er your creed--O waken all,                     15
  Whate'er your temper, at your Country's call;
  Resolving (this a free-born Nation can)
  To have one Soul, and perish to a man,
  Or save this honoured Land from every Lord
  But British reason and the British sword.                      20




       *       *       *       *       *



                       END OF VOLUME II (OF EIGHT)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of William
Wordsworth, Vol. II., by William Wordsworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORDSWORTH, VOL. II. ***

***** This file should be named 12145-8.txt or 12145-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/1/4/12145/

Produced by Jonathon Ingram, Clytie Siddall and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team!


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

?The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth,
Vol. III, by William Wordsworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth, Vol. III

Author: William Wordsworth

Release Date: May 19, 2004 [EBook #12383]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIAM WORDSWORTH POETRY, III ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Clytie Siddall and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team!





                              THE POETICAL WORKS

                                     OF



                              WILLIAM WORDSWORTH





                                  EDITED BY
                               WILLIAM KNIGHT


                                   VOL. III


                                    1896






CONTENTS


1804

  "She was a Phantom of delight"

  "I wandered lonely as a cloud"

  The Affliction of Margaret--

  The Forsaken

  Repentance

  Address to my Infant Daughter, Dora

  The Kitten and Falling Leaves

  The Small Celandine

  At Applethwaite, near Keswick

  Vaudracour and Julia


1805

  French Revolution

  Ode to Duty

  To a Sky-Lark

  Fidelity

  Incident characteristic of a Favourite Dog

  Tribute to the Memory of the same Dog

  To the Daisy (#4)

  Elegiac Stanzas

  Elegiac Verses

  "When, to the attractions of the busy world"

  The Cottager to her Infant

  The Waggoner

  The Prelude; or, Growth of a Poet's Mind

  From the Italian of Michael Angelo

  From the Same

  From the Same. To the Supreme Being


APPENDICES

         I

        II

       III

        IV

         V

        VI

       VII






                      WORDSWORTH'S POETICAL WORKS





1804

The poems written in 1804 were not numerous; and, with the exception of
'The Small Celandine', the stanzas beginning "I wandered lonely as a
cloud," and "She was a Phantom of delight," they were less remarkable
than those of the two preceding, and the three following years.
Wordsworth's poetical activity in 1804 is not recorded, however, in
Lyrical Ballads or Sonnets, but in 'The Prelude', much of which was
thought out, and afterwards dictated to Dorothy or Mary Wordsworth, on
the terrace walk of Lancrigg during that year; while the 'Ode,
Intimations of Immortality' was altered and added to, although it did
not receive its final form till 1806. In the sixth book of 'The
Prelude', p. 222, the lines occur:

  'Four years and thirty, told this very week,
  Have I been now a sojourner on earth.'

That part of the great autobiographical poem must therefore
have been composed in April, 1804.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"SHE WAS A PHANTOM OF DELIGHT"


Composed 1804.--Published 1807


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. The germ of this poem was four lines
composed as a part of the verses on the 'Highland Girl'. Though
beginning in this way, it was written from my heart, as is sufficiently
obvious.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  She was a Phantom of delight
  When first she gleamed upon my sight; [A]
  A lovely Apparition, sent
  To be a moment's ornament;
  Her eyes as stars of Twilight fair;                               5
  Like Twilight's, too, her dusky hair;
  But all things else about her drawn
  From May-time and the cheerful Dawn; [1]
  A dancing Shape, an Image gay,
  To haunt, to startle, and way-lay.                               10

  I saw her upon nearer view,
  A Spirit, yet a Woman too!
  Her household motions light and free,
  And steps of virgin-liberty;
  A countenance in which did meet                                  15
  Sweet records, promises as sweet;
  A Creature not too bright or good
  For human nature's daily food;
  For transient sorrows, simple wiles,
  Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles.                  20

  And now I see with eye serene
  The very pulse of the machine;
  A Being breathing thoughtful breath,
  A Traveller between [2] life and death;
  The reason firm, the temperate will,                             25
  Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill;
  A perfect Woman, [3] nobly planned,
  To warn, to comfort, and command;
  And yet a Spirit still, and bright
  With something of angelic light. [4]                             30



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  From May-time's brightest, liveliest dawn;    1836

The text of 1840 returns to that of 1807.]


[Variant 2:

1832.

  ... betwixt ...    1807.]


[Variant 3:

1815.

  A perfect Woman; ...   1807.]


[Variant 4:

1845.

  ... of an angel light.    1807.

  ...       angel-light.    1836.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare two references to Mary Wordsworth in 'The Prelude':

    'Another maid there was, who also shed
  A gladness o'er that season, then to me,
  By her exulting outside look of youth
  And placid under-countenance, first endeared;'

(Book vi. l. 224).

  'She came, no more a phantom to adorn
  A moment, but an inmate of the heart,
  And yet a spirit, there for me enshrined
  To penetrate the lofty and the low;'

(Book xiv, l. 268).--Ed.]



It is not easy to say what were the "four lines composed as a part of
the verses on the 'Highland Girl'" which the Fenwick note tells us was
"the germ of this poem." They may be lines now incorporated in those 'To
a Highland Girl', vol. ii. p. 389, or they may be lines in the present
poem, which Wordsworth wrote at first for the 'Highland Girl', but
afterwards transferred to this one. They _may_ have been the first four
lines of the later poem. The two should be read consecutively, and
compared.

After Wordsworth's death, a writer in the 'Daily News', January
1859--then understood to be Miss Harriet Martineau--wrote thus:

  "In the 'Memoirs', by the nephew of the poet, it is said that these
  verses refer to Mrs. Wordsworth; but for half of Wordsworth's life it
  was always understood that they referred to some other phantom which
  'gleamed upon his sight' before Mary Hutchinson."

This statement is much more than improbable; it is, I think, disproved
by the Fenwick note. They cannot refer to the "Lucy" of the Goslar
poems; and Wordsworth indicates, as plainly as he chose, to whom they
actually do refer. Compare the Hon. Justice Coleridge's account of a
conversation with Wordsworth ('Memoirs', vol. ii. p. 306), in which the
poet expressly said that the lines were written on his wife. The
question was, however, set at rest in a conversation of Wordsworth with
Henry Crabb Robinson, who wrote in his 'Diary' on

  "May 12 (1842).--Wordsworth said that the poems 'Our walk was far
  among the ancient trees' [vol. ii. p. 167], then 'She was a Phantom of
  delight,' [B] and finally the two sonnets 'To a Painter', should be
  read in succession as exhibiting the different phases of his affection
  to his wife."

('Diary, Reminiscences, and Correspondence of Henry Crabb Robinson',
vol. iii. p. 197.)

The use of the word "machine," in the third stanza of the poem, has been
much criticised, but for a similar use of the term, see the sequel to
'The Waggoner' (p. 107):

  'Forgive me, then; for I had been
  On friendly terms with this Machine.'

See also 'Hamlet' (act II. scene ii. l. 124):


  'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him.'

The progress of mechanical industry in Britain since the beginning of
the present century has given a more limited, and purely technical,
meaning to the word, than it bore when Wordsworth used it in these two
instances.--Ed.


[Footnote B: The poet expressly told me that these verses were on his
wife.--H. C. R.]





       *       *       *       *       *





"I WANDERED LONELY AS A CLOUD"


Composed 1804.--Published 1807


[Town-end, 1804. The two best lines in it are by Mary. The daffodils
grew, and still grow, on the margin of Ullswater, and probably may be
seen to this day as beautiful in the month of March, nodding their
golden heads beside the dancing and foaming waves.--I. F.]

This was No. VII. in the series of Poems, entitled, in the edition of
1807, "Moods of my own Mind." In 1815, and afterwards, it was classed by
Wordsworth among his "Poems of the Imagination."--Ed.




  I wandered lonely as a cloud
  That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
  When all at once I saw a crowd,
  A host, of golden [1] daffodils;
  Beside the lake, beneath the trees,                          5
  Fluttering and dancing in the breeze. [2]

  Continuous as the stars that shine
  And twinkle on the milky way,
  They stretched in never-ending line
  Along the margin of a bay:                                  10
  Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
  Tossing their heads in sprightly dance. [3]

  The waves beside them danced; but they
  Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:
  A poet could not but be gay, [4]                            15
  In such a jocund [5] company:
  I gazed--and gazed--but little thought
  What wealth the show to me had brought:

  For oft, when on my couch I lie
  In vacant or in pensive mood,                               20
  They flash upon that inward eye
  Which is the bliss of solitude;
  And then my heart with pleasure fills,
  And dances with the daffodils.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815.

  ... dancing ...        1807.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

  Along the Lake, beneath the trees,
  Ten thousand dancing in the breeze.     1807]


[Variant 3: This stanza was added in the edition of 1815.]


[Variant 4:

1807

  ... be but gay,      1836.

The 1840 edition returns to the text of 1807.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  ... laughing ...     1807.]



The following is from Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal, under date,
Thursday, April 15, 1802:

  "When we were in the woods beyond Gowbarrow Park, we saw a few
  daffodils close to the water side. We fancied that the sea had floated
  the seeds ashore, and that the little colony had so sprung up. But as
  we went along there were more, and yet more; and, at last, under the
  boughs of the trees, we saw that there was a long belt of them along
  the shore, about the breadth of a country turnpike road. I never saw
  daffodils so beautiful. They grew among the mossy stones, about and
  above them; some rested their heads upon these stones, as on a pillow
  for weariness; and the rest tossed and reeled and danced, and seemed
  as if they verily laughed with the wind that blew upon them over the
  lake. They looked so gay, ever glancing, ever changing. This wind blew
  directly over the lake to them. There was here and there a little
  knot, and a few stragglers higher up; but they were so few as not to
  disturb the simplicity, unity, and life of that one busy highway. We
  rested again and again. The bays were stormy, and we heard the waves
  at different distances, and in the middle of the water, like the
  sea...."

In the edition of 1815 there is a footnote to the lines

  'They flash upon that inward eye
  Which is the bliss of solitude'

to the following effect:

  "The subject of these Stanzas is rather an elementary feeling and
  simple impression (approaching to the nature of an ocular spectrum)
  upon the imaginative faculty, than an exertion of it. The one which
  follows [A] is strictly a Reverie; and neither that, nor the next
  after it in succession, 'Power of Music', would have been placed here
  except for the reason given in the foregoing note."

The being "placed here" refers to its being included among the "Poems of
the Imagination." The "foregoing note" is the note appended to 'The Horn
of Egremont Castle'; and the "reason given" in it is "to avoid a
needless multiplication of the Classes" into which Wordsworth divided
his poems. This note of 181? [B], is reprinted mainly to show the
difficulties to which Wordsworth was reduced by the artificial method of
arrangement referred to. The following letter to Mr. Wrangham is a more
appropriate illustration of the poem of "The Daffodils." It was written,
the late Bishop of Lincoln says, "sometime afterwards." (See 'Memoirs of
Wordsworth', vol. i. pp. 183, 184); and, for the whole of the letter,
see a subsequent volume of this edition.

  "GRASMERE, Nov. 4.

  "MY DEAR WRANGHAM,--I am indeed much pleased that Mrs. Wrangham and
  yourself have been gratified by these breathings of simple nature. You
  mention Butler, Montagu's friend; not Tom Butler, but the conveyancer:
  when I was in town in spring, he happened to see the volumes lying on
  Montagu's mantelpiece, and to glance his eye upon the very poem of
  'The Daffodils.' 'Aye,' says he, 'a fine morsel this for the
  Reviewers.' When this was told me (for I was not present) I observed
  that there were 'two lines' in that little poem which, if thoroughly
  felt, would annihilate nine-tenths of the reviews of the kingdom, as
  they would find no readers. The lines I alluded to were these:

    'They flash upon that inward eye
    Which is the bliss of solitude.'"

These two lines were composed by Mrs. Wordsworth. In 1877 the daffodils
were still growing in abundance on the shore of Ullswater, below
Gowbarrow Park.

Compare the last four lines of James Montgomery's poem, 'The Little
Cloud':

  'Bliss in possession will not last:
  Remembered joys are never past:
  At once the fountain, stream, and sea,
  They were--they are--they yet shall be.'

Ed.


[Footnote A:  It was 'The Reverie of Poor Susan'.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: This is an error in the original printed text. Evidently a
year before the above-mentioned publication in 1815: one of 1810-1815.
text Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE AFFLICTION OF MARGARET--[A]


Composed 1804.--Published 1807


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. This was taken from the case of a poor
widow who lived in the town of Penrith. Her sorrow was well known to
Mrs. Wordsworth, to my sister, and, I believe, to the whole town. She
kept a shop, and when she saw a stranger passing by, she was in the
habit of going out into the street to enquire of him after her
son.--I. F.]

Included by Wordsworth among his "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  I        Where art thou, my beloved Son,
           Where art thou, worse to me than dead?
           Oh find me, prosperous or undone!
           Or, if the grave be now thy bed,
           Why am I ignorant of the same                        5
           That I may rest; and neither blame
           Nor sorrow may attend thy name?

  II       Seven years, alas! to have received
           No tidings of an only child;
           To have despaired, have hoped, believed,            10
           And been for evermore beguiled; [1]
           Sometimes with thoughts of very bliss!
           I catch at them, and then I miss;
           Was ever darkness like to this?

  III      He was among the prime in worth,                    15
           An object beauteous to behold;
           Well born, well bred; I sent him forth
           Ingenuous, innocent, and bold:
           If things ensued that wanted grace,
           As hath been said, they were not base;              20
           And never blush was on my face.

  IV       Ah! little doth the young-one dream,
           When full of play and childish cares,
           What power is in [2] his wildest scream,
           Heard by his mother unawares!                       25
           He knows it not, he cannot guess:
           Years to a mother bring distress;
           But do not make her love the less.

  V        Neglect me! no, I suffered long
           From that ill thought; and, being blind,            30
           Said, "Pride shall help me in my wrong:
           Kind mother have I been, as kind
           As ever breathed:" and that is true;
           I've wet my path with tears like dew,
           Weeping for him when no one knew.                   35

  VI       My Son, if thou be humbled, poor,
           Hopeless of honour and of gain,
           Oh! do not dread thy mother's door;
           Think not of me with grief and pain:
           I now can see with better eyes;                     40
           And worldly grandeur I despise,
           And fortune with her gifts and lies.

  VII      Alas! the fowls of heaven have wings,
           And blasts of heaven will aid their flight;
           They mount--how short a voyage brings               45
           The wanderers back to their delight!
           Chains tie us down by land and sea;
           And wishes, vain as mine, may be
           All that is left to comfort thee.

  VIII     Perhaps some dungeon hears thee groan,              50
           Maimed, mangled by inhuman men;
           Or thou upon a desert thrown
           Inheritest the lion's den;
           Or hast been summoned to the deep,
           Thou, thou and all thy mates, to keep               55
           An incommunicable sleep.

  IX       I look for ghosts; but none will force
           Their way to me: 'tis falsely said
           That there was ever intercourse
           Between [3] the living and the dead;                60
           For, surely, then I should have sight
           Of him I wait for day and night,
           With love and longings infinite.

  X        My apprehensions come in crowds;
           I dread the rustling of the grass;                  65
           The very shadows of the clouds
           Have power to shake me as they pass:
           I question things and do not find
           One that will answer to my mind;
           And all the world appears unkind.                   70

  XI       Beyond participation lie
           My troubles, and beyond relief:
           If any chance to heave a sigh,
           They pity me, and not my grief.
           Then come to me, my Son, or send                    75
           Some tidings that my woes may end;
           I have no other earthly friend!



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  To have despair'd, and have believ'd,
  And be for evermore beguil'd;       1807.]


[Variant 2:

1832.

  What power hath even ...        1807.]


[Variant 3:

1832.

  Betwixt ...         1807.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In the edition of 1807, the title was 'The Affliction of
Margaret--of--'; in 1820, it was 'The Affliction of Margaret'; and in
1845, it was as above. In an early MS. it was 'The Affliction of
Mary--of--'. For an as yet unpublished Preface to it, see volume viii.
of this edition.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE FORSAKEN


Composed 1804.--Published 1842


[This was an overflow from 'The Affliction of Margaret', and was
excluded as superfluous there, but preserved in the faint hope that it
may turn to account by restoring a shy lover to some forsaken damsel. My
poetry has been complained of as deficient in interests of this sort,--a
charge which the piece beginning, "Lyre! though such power do in thy
magic live," will scarcely tend to obviate. The natural imagery of these
verses was supplied by frequent, I might say intense, observation of the
Rydal torrent. What an animating contrast is the ever-changing aspect of
that, and indeed of every one of our mountain brooks, to the monotonous
tone and unmitigated fury of such streams among the Alps as are fed all
the summer long by glaciers and melting snows. A traveller observing the
exquisite purity of the great rivers, such as the Rhone at Geneva, and
the Reuss at Lucerne, when they issue out of their respective lakes,
might fancy for a moment that some power in nature produced this
beautiful change, with a view to make amends for those Alpine sullyings
which the waters exhibit near their fountain heads; but, alas! how soon
does that purity depart before the influx of tributary waters that have
flowed through cultivated plains and the crowded abodes of men.--I. F.]

Included by Wordsworth among his "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  The peace which others seek they find;
  The heaviest storms not longest last;
  Heaven grants even to the guiltiest mind
  An amnesty for what is past;
  When will my sentence be reversed?                           5
  I only pray to know the worst;
  And wish as if my heart would burst.

  O weary struggle! silent years
  Tell seemingly no doubtful tale;
  And yet they leave it short, and fears                      10
  And hopes are strong and will prevail.
  My calmest faith escapes not pain;
  And, feeling that the hope is vain,
  I think that he will come again.





       *       *       *       *       *





REPENTANCE

A PASTORAL BALLAD


Composed 1804.--Published 1820


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. Suggested by the conversation of our
next neighbour, Margaret Ashburner.--I. F.]

This "next neighbour" is constantly referred to in Dorothy Wordsworth's
Grasmere Journal.

Included in 1820 among the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection"; in 1827,
and afterwards, it was classed with those "founded on the
Affections."--Ed.




  The fields which with covetous spirit we sold,
  Those beautiful fields, the delight of the day,
  Would have brought us more good than a burthen of gold, [1]
  Could we but have been as contented as they.

  When the troublesome Tempter beset us, said I,                       5
  "Let him come, with his purse proudly grasped in his hand;
  But, Allan, be true to me, Allan,--we'll die [2]
  Before he shall go with an inch of the land!"

  There dwelt we, as happy as birds in their bowers;
  Unfettered as bees that in gardens abide;                           10
  We could do what we liked [3] with the land, it was ours;
  And for us the brook murmured that ran by its side.

  But now we are strangers, go early or late;
  And often, like one overburthened with sin,
  With my hand on the latch of the half-opened gate, [4]              15
  I look at the fields, but [5] I cannot go in!

  When I walk by the hedge on a bright summer's day,
  Or sit in the shade of my grandfather's tree,
  A stern face it puts on, as if ready to say,
  "What ails you, that you must come creeping to me!"                 20

  With our pastures about us, we could not be sad;
  Our comfort was near if we ever were crost;
  But the comfort, the blessings, and wealth that we had,
  We slighted them all,--and our birth-right was lost. [6]

  Oh, ill-judging sire of an innocent son                             25
  Who must now be a wanderer! but peace to that strain!
  Think of evening's repose when our labour was done,
  The sabbath's return; and its leisure's soft chain!

  And in sickness, if night had been sparing of sleep,
  How cheerful, at sunrise, the hill where I stood, [7]               30
  Looking down on the kine, and our treasure of sheep
  That besprinkled the field; 'twas like youth in my blood!

  Now I cleave to the house, and am dull as a snail;
  And, oftentimes, hear the church-bell with a sigh,
  That follows the thought--We've no land in the vale,                35
  Save six feet of earth where our forefathers lie!



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1820.

  the delight of our day,                                  MS.

  O fools that we were--we had land which we sold          MS.

  O fools that we were without virtue to hold              MS.

  The fields that together contentedly lay
  Would have done us more good than another man's gold     MS.]


[Variant 2:

1820.

  When the bribe of the Tempter beset us, said I,
  Let him come with his bags proudly grasped in his hand.
  But, Thomas, be true to me, Thomas, we'll die             MS.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  ... chose ...      1820 and MS.]


[Variant 4:

1820.

  When my hand has half-lifted the latch of the gate,      MS.]


[Variant 5:

1820.

  ... and ...      MS.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  But the blessings, and comfort, and wealth that we had,
  We slighted them all,--and our birth-right was lost.
                                                           1820 and MS.

  But we traitorously gave the best friend that we had
  For spiritless pelf--as we felt to our cost!             MS.]


[Variant 7:

1820.

  When my sick crazy body had lain without sleep,
  How cheering the sunshiny vale where I stood,      MS.]





       *       *       *       *       *





ADDRESS TO MY INFANT DAUGHTER, DORA, [A]

ON BEING REMINDED THAT SHE WAS A MONTH OLD THAT DAY, SEPTEMBER 16


Composed September 16, 1804.--Published 1815


Included by Wordsworth among his "Poems of the Fancy."--Ed.




--Hast thou then survived--
  Mild Offspring of infirm humanity,
  Meek Infant! among all forlornest things
  The most forlorn--one life of that bright star,
  The second glory of the Heavens?--Thou hast;                         5
  Already hast survived that great decay,
  That transformation through the wide earth felt,
  And by all nations. In that Being's sight
  From whom the Race of human kind proceed,
  A thousand years are but as yesterday;                              10
  And one day's narrow circuit is to Him
  Not less capacious than a thousand years.
  But what is time? What outward glory? neither
  A measure is of Thee, whose claims extend
  Through "heaven's eternal year." [B]--Yet hail to Thee,             15
  Frail, feeble, Monthling!--by that name, methinks,
  Thy scanty breathing-time is portioned out
  Not idly.--Hadst thou been of Indian birth,
  Couched on a casual bed of moss and leaves,
  And rudely canopied by leafy boughs,                                20
  Or to the churlish elements exposed
  On the blank plains,--the coldness of the night,
  Or the night's darkness, or its cheerful face
  Of beauty, by the changing moon adorned,
  Would, with imperious admonition, then                              25
  Have scored thine age, and punctually timed
  Thine infant history, on the minds of those
  Who might have wandered with thee.--Mother's love,
  Nor less than mother's love in other breasts,
  Will, among us warm-clad and warmly housed,                         30
  Do for thee what the finger of the heavens
  Doth all too often harshly execute
  For thy unblest coevals, amid wilds
  Where fancy hath small liberty to grace
  The affections, to exalt them or refine;                            35
  And the maternal sympathy itself,
  Though strong, is, in the main, a joyless tie
  Of naked instinct, wound about the heart.
  Happier, far happier is thy lot and ours!
  Even now--to solemnise thy helpless state,                          40
  And to enliven in the mind's regard
  Thy passive beauty--parallels have risen,
  Resemblances, or contrasts, that connect,
  Within the region of a father's thoughts,
  Thee and thy mate and sister of the sky.                            45
  And first;--thy sinless progress, through a world
  By sorrow darkened and by care disturbed,
  Apt likeness bears to hers, through gathered clouds,
  Moving untouched in silver purity,
  And cheering oft-times their reluctant gloom.                       50
  Fair are ye both, and both are free from stain:
  But thou, how leisurely thou fill'st thy horn
  With brightness! leaving her to post along,
  And range about, disquieted in change,
  And still impatient of the shape she wears.                         55
  Once up, once down the hill, one journey, Babe
  That will suffice thee; and it seems that now
  Thou hast fore-knowledge that such task is thine;
  Thou travellest so contentedly, and sleep'st
  In such a heedless peace. Alas! full soon                           60
  Hath this conception, grateful to behold,
  Changed countenance, like an object sullied o'er
  By breathing mist; and thine appears to be
  A mournful labour, while to her is given
  Hope, and a renovation without end.                                 65
  --That smile forbids the thought; for on thy face
  Smiles are beginning, like the beams of dawn,
  To shoot and circulate; smiles have there been seen;
  Tranquil assurances that Heaven supports
  The feeble motions of thy life, and cheers                          70
  Thy loneliness: or shall those smiles be called
  Feelers of love, put forth as if to explore
  This untried world, and to prepare thy way
  Through a strait passage intricate and dim?
  Such are they; and the same are tokens, signs,                      75
  Which, when the appointed season hath arrived,
  Joy, as her holiest language, shall adopt;
  And Reason's godlike Power be proud to own.



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The title from 1815 to 1845 was 'Address to my Infant
Daughter, on being reminded that she was a Month old, on that Day'.
After her death in 1847, her name was added to the title.--Ed.]

[Footnote B: See Dryden's poem, 'To the pious memory of the accomplished
young lady, Mrs. Anne Killigrew', I. l. 15.--Ed.]


The text of this poem was never altered.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE KITTEN AND FALLING LEAVES [A]


Composed 1804.--Published 1807


[Seen at Town-end, Grasmere. The elder-bush has long since disappeared;
it hung over the wall near the cottage: and the kitten continued to leap
up, catching the leaves as here described. The Infant was Dora.--J. F.]

One of the "Poems of the Fancy." In Henry Crabb Robinson's 'Diary,
etc.', under date Sept. 10, 1816, we find,

  "He" (Wordsworth) "quoted from 'The Kitten and the Falling Leaves' to
  show he had connected even the kitten with the great, awful, and
  mysterious powers of Nature."

Ed.




  That way look, my Infant, [1] lo!
  What a pretty baby-show!
  See the Kitten on the wall,
  Sporting with the leaves that fall,
  Withered leaves--one--two--and three--5
  From the lofty elder-tree!
  Through the calm and frosty [2] air
  Of this morning bright and fair,
  Eddying round and round they sink
  Softly, slowly: one might think,                          10
  From the motions that are made,
  Every little leaf conveyed
  Sylph or Faery hither tending,--
  To this lower world descending,
  Each invisible and mute,                                  15
  In his wavering parachute.
----But the Kitten, how she starts,
  Crouches, stretches, paws, and darts! [3]
  First at one, and then its fellow
  Just as light and just as yellow;                         20
  There are many now--now one--
  Now they stop and there are none:
  What intenseness of desire
  In her upward eye of fire!
  With a tiger-leap half-way                                25
  Now she meets the coming prey,
  Lets it go as fast, and then
  Has it in her power again:
  Now she works with three or four,
  Like an Indian conjurer;                                  30
  Quick as he in feats of art,
  Far beyond in joy of heart.
  Were her antics played in the eye
  Of a thousand standers-by,
  Clapping hands with shout and stare,                      35
  What would little Tabby care
  For the plaudits of the crowd?
  Over happy to be proud,
  Over wealthy in the treasure
  Of her own exceeding pleasure!                            40

    'Tis a pretty baby-treat;
  Nor, I deem, for me unmeet; [4]
  Here, for neither Babe nor [5] me,
  Other play-mate can I see.
  Of the countless living things,                           45
  That with stir of feet and wings
  (In the sun or under shade,
  Upon bough or grassy blade)
  And with busy revellings,
  Chirp and song, and murmurings,                           50
  Made this orchard's narrow space,
  And this vale so blithe a place;
  Multitudes are swept away
  Never more to breathe the day:
  Some are sleeping; some in bands                          55
  Travelled into distant lands;
  Others slunk to moor and wood,
  Far from human neighbourhood;
  And, among the Kinds that keep
  With us closer fellowship,                                60
  With us openly abide,
  All have laid their mirth aside.

    Where is he that giddy [6] Sprite,
  Blue-cap, with his colours bright,
  Who was blest as bird could be,                           65
  Feeding in the apple-tree;
  Made such wanton spoil and rout,
  Turning blossoms inside out;
  Hung--head pointing towards the ground--[7]
  Fluttered, perched, into a round                          70
  Bound himself, and then unbound;
  Lithest, gaudiest Harlequin!
  Prettiest tumbler ever seen!
  Light of heart and light of limb;
  What is now become of Him?                                75
  Lambs, that through the mountains went
  Frisking, bleating merriment,
  When the year was in its prime,
  They are sobered by this time.
  If you look to vale or [8] hill,                          80
  If you listen, all is still,
  Save a little neighbouring rill,
  That from out the rocky ground
  Strikes a solitary sound.
  Vainly glitter [9] hill and plain,                        85
  And the air is calm in vain;
  Vainly Morning spreads the lure
  Of a sky serene and pure;
  Creature none can she decoy
  Into open sign of joy:                                    90
  Is it that they have a fear
  Of the dreary season near?
  Or that other pleasures be
  Sweeter even than gaiety?

    Yet, whate'er enjoyments dwell                          95
  In the impenetrable cell
  Of the silent heart which Nature
  Furnishes to every creature;
  Whatsoe'er we feel and know
  Too sedate for outward show,                             100
  Such a light of gladness breaks,
  Pretty Kitten! from thy freaks,--
  Spreads with such a living grace
  O'er my little Dora's [10] face;
  Yes, the sight so stirs and charms                       105
  Thee, Baby, laughing in my arms,
  That almost I could repine
  That your transports are not mine,
  That I do not wholly fare
  Even as ye do, thoughtless pair! [11]                    110
  And I will have my careless season
  Spite of melancholy reason, [12]
  Will walk through life in such a way
  That, when time brings on decay,
  Now and then I may possess                               115
  Hours of perfect gladsomeness. [13]
--Pleased by any random toy;
  By a kitten's busy joy,
  Or an infant's laughing eye
  Sharing in the ecstasy;                                  120
  I would fare like that or this,
  Find my wisdom in my bliss;
  Keep the sprightly soul awake,
  And have faculties to take,
  Even from things [14] by sorrow wrought,                 125
  Matter for a jocund thought,
  Spite of care, and spite of grief,
  To gambol with Life's falling Leaf.



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

  ... Darling, ...    MS.]


[Variant 2:

  ... silent ...      MS.]


[Variant 3:

  Knows not what she would be at,
  Now on this side, now on that.       MS.]


[Variant 4:

  One for me, too, as is meet.         MS.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  ... or ...      1807.]


[Variant 6:

  ... busy ...    MS.]


[Variant 7:

1836,

  Hung with head towards the ground,     1807.]


[Variant 8:

  ... and ...     MS.]


[Variant 9:

1836.

  ... glitters ...     1807.]


[Variant 10:

1849.

  Laura's [a]    1807]


[Variant 11: Additional lines:

  But I'll take a hint from you,
  And to pleasure will be true,         MS.]


[Variant 12:

  Be it songs of endless Spring
  Which the frolic Muses sing,
  Jest, and Mirth's unruly brood
  Dancing to the Phrygian mood;
  Be it love, or be it wine,
  Myrtle wreath, or ivy twine,
  Or a garland made of both;
  Whether then Philosophy
  That would fill us full of glee
  Seeing that our breath we draw
  Under an unbending law,
  That our years are halting never;
  Quickly gone, and gone for ever,
  And would teach us thence to brave
  The conclusion in the grave;
  Whether it be these that give
  Strength and spirit so to live,
  Or the conquest best be made,
  By a sober course and staid,
  I would walk in such a way,           MS.]


[Variant 13:

  ... joyousness.     MS.]


[Variant 14:

  From the things by ...     MS.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A:  In the editions of 1807-1832 the title was 'The Kitten and
the Falling Leaves'.--Ed.]



       *       *       *       *       *


SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: Dora Wordsworth died in July 1847. Probably the change
of text in 1849--one of the latest which the poet made--was due to the
wish to connect this poem with memories of his dead daughter's
childhood, and her "laughing eye."--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





THE SMALL CELANDINE [A]


Composed 1804.--Published 1807


[Grasmere, Town-end. It is remarkable that this flower coming out so
early in the spring as it does, and so bright and beautiful, and in such
profusion, should not have been noticed earlier in English verse. What
adds much to the interest that attends it, is its habit of shutting
itself up and opening out according to the degree of light and
temperature of the air.--I. F.]

In pencil on opposite page "Has not Chaucer noticed it?"--W. W.

This was classed by Wordsworth among his "Poems referring to the Period
of Old Age."-Ed.




  There is a Flower, the lesser Celandine,
  That shrinks, like many more, from cold and rain;
  And, the first moment that the sun may shine,
  Bright as the sun himself, [1] 'tis out again!

  When hailstones have been falling, swarm on swarm,                 5
  Or blasts the green field and the trees distrest,
  Oft have I seen it muffled up from harm,
  In close self-shelter, like a Thing at rest.

  But lately, one rough day, this Flower I passed
  And recognised it, though an altered form,                        10
  Now standing forth an offering to the blast,
  And buffeted at will by rain and storm.

  I stopped, and said with inly-muttered voice,
  "It doth not love the shower, nor seek the cold:
  This neither is its courage nor its choice,                       15
  But its necessity in being old.

  "The sunshine may not cheer [2] it, nor the dew;
  It cannot help itself in its decay;
  Stiff in its members, withered, changed of hue."
  And, in my spleen, I smiled that it was grey.                     20

  To be a Prodigal's Favourite--then, worse truth,
  A Miser's Pensioner--behold our lot!
  O Man, that from thy fair and shining youth
  Age might but take the things Youth needed not!



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  ... itself, ... 1807.]


[Variant 2:

1827

  ... bless ...   1807.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Common Pilewort.--W. W. 1807.]



With the last stanza compare one from 'The Fountain', vol. ii. p. 93:

  'Thus fares it still in our decay:
  And yet the wiser mind
  Mourns less for what age takes away
  Than what it leaves behind.'

Compare also the other two poems on the Celandine, vol. ii. pp. 300,
303, written in a previous year.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





AT APPLETHWAITE, NEAR KESWICK

1804


Composed 1804.--Published 1842


[This was presented to me by Sir George Beaumont, with a view to the
erection of a house upon it, for the sake of being near to Coleridge,
then living, and likely to remain, at Greta Hall, near Keswick. The
severe necessities that prevented this arose from his domestic
situation. This little property, with a considerable addition that still
leaves it very small, lies beautifully upon the banks of a rill that
gurgles down the side of Skiddaw; and the orchard and other parts of the
grounds command a magnificent prospect of Derwent Water, the mountains
of Borrowdale and Newlands. Not many years ago I gave the place to my
daughter.--I. F.]

In pencil on the opposite page in Dora Wordsworth's (Mrs. Quillinan's)
handwriting--"Many years ago, Sir; for it was given when she was a frail
feeble monthling."

One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets."--Ed.




  BEAUMONT! it was thy wish that I should rear
  A seemly Cottage in this sunny Dell,
  On favoured ground, thy gift, where I might dwell
  In neighbourhood with One to me most dear,
  That undivided we from year to year                             5
  Might work in our high Calling--a bright hope
  To which our fancies, mingling, gave free scope
  Till checked by some necessities severe.
  And should these slacken, honoured BEAUMONT! still
  Even then we may perhaps in vain implore                       10
  Leave of our fate thy wishes [1] to fulfil.
  Whether this boon be granted us or not,
  Old Skiddaw will look down upon the Spot
  With pride, the Muses love it evermore. [2] [A]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

  ... pleasure ... MS.]


[Variant 2:

  ... will be proud, and that same spot
  Be dear unto the Muses evermore.          MS.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In the edition of 1842 the following footnote is given by
Wordsworth,

  "This biographical Sonnet, if so it may be called, together with the
  Epistle that follows, have been long suppressed from feelings of
  personal delicacy."

The "Epistle" was that addressed to Sir George Beaumont in 1811.--Ed.]


This little property at Applethwaite now belongs to Mr. Gordon
Wordsworth, the grandson of the poet. It is a "sunny dell" only in its
upper reaches, above the spot where the cottage--which still bears
Wordsworth's name--is built. This sonnet, and Sir George Beaumont's wish
that Wordsworth and Coleridge should live so near each other, as to be
able to carry on joint literary labour, recall the somewhat similar wish
and proposal on the part of W. Calvert, unfolded in a letter from
Coleridge to Sir Humphry Davy.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *




VAUDRACOUR AND JULIA


Composed 1804.--Published 1820


The following Tale was written as an Episode, in a work from which its
length may perhaps exclude it. [A] The facts are true; no invention as
to these has been exercised, as none was needed.--W. W. 1820.

[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. Faithfully narrated, though with the
omission of many pathetic circumstances, from the mouth of a French
lady, [B] who had been an eye-and-ear witness of all that was done and
said. Many long years after, I was told that Dupligne was then a monk in
the Convent of La Trappe.--I. F.]

This was included among the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  O happy time of youthful lovers (thus
  My story may begin) O balmy time,
  In which a love-knot on a lady's brow
  Is fairer than the fairest star in heaven!
  To such inheritance of blessed fancy                              5
  (Fancy that sports more desperately with minds
  Than ever fortune hath been known to do)
  The high-born Vaudracour was brought, by years
  Whose progress had a little overstepped
  His stripling prime. A town of small repute,                     10
  Among the vine-clad mountains of Auvergne,
  Was the Youth's birth-place. There he wooed a Maid
  Who heard the heart-felt music of his suit
  With answering vows. Plebeian was the stock,
  Plebeian, though ingenuous, the stock,                           15
  From which her graces and her honours sprung:
  And hence the father of the enamoured Youth,
  With haughty indignation, spurned the thought
  Of such alliance.--From their cradles up,
  With but a step between their several homes,                     20
  Twins had they been in pleasure; after strife
  And petty quarrels, had grown fond again;
  Each other's advocate, each other's stay;
  And, in their happiest moments, not content,
  If more divided than a sportive pair [1]                         25
  Of sea-fowl, conscious both that they are hovering
  Within the eddy of a common blast,
  Or hidden only by the concave depth
  Of neighbouring billows from each other's sight.

    Thus, not without concurrence of an age                        30
  Unknown to memory, was an earnest given
  By ready nature for a life of love,
  For endless constancy, and placid truth;
  But whatsoe'er of such rare treasure lay
  Reserved, had fate permitted, for support                        35
  Of their maturer years, his present mind
  Was under fascination;--he beheld
  A vision, and adored the thing he saw.
  Arabian fiction never filled the world
  With half the wonders that were wrought for him.                 40
  Earth breathed in one great presence of the spring;
  Life turned the meanest of her implements,
  Before his eyes, to price above all gold;
  The house she dwelt in was a sainted shrine;
  Her chamber-window did surpass in glory                          45
  The portals of the dawn; all paradise
  Could, by the simple opening of a door,
  Let itself in upon him:--pathways, walks,
  Swarmed with enchantment, till his spirit sank,
  Surcharged, within him, overblest to move                        50
  Beneath a sun that wakes a weary world
  To its dull round of ordinary cares;
  A man too happy for mortality!

    So passed the time, till whether through effect
  Of some unguarded moment that dissolved                          55
  Virtuous restraint--ah, speak it, think it, not!
  Deem rather that the fervent Youth, who saw
  So many bars between his present state
  And the dear haven where he wished to be
  In honourable wedlock with his Love,                             60
  Was in his judgment tempted to decline
  To perilous weakness, [2] and entrust his cause
  To nature for a happy end of all;
  Deem that by such fond hope the Youth was swayed,
  And bear with their transgression, when I add                    65
  That Julia, wanting yet the name of wife,
  Carried about her for a secret grief
  The promise of a mother.
                               To conceal
  The threatened shame, the parents of the Maid                    70
  Found means to hurry her away by night,
  And unforewarned, that in some distant spot
  She might remain shrouded in privacy,
  Until the babe was born. When morning came,
  The Lover, thus bereft, stung with his loss,                     75
  And all uncertain whither he should turn,
  Chafed like a wild beast in the toils; but soon
  Discovering traces of the fugitives,
  Their steps he followed to the Maid's retreat.
  Easily may the sequel be divined--[3]                            80
  Walks to and fro--watchings at every hour;
  And the fair Captive, who, whene'er she may,
  Is busy at her casement as the swallow
  Fluttering its pinions, almost within reach,
  About the pendent nest, did thus espy                            85
  Her Lover!--thence a stolen interview,
  Accomplished under friendly shade of night.

    I pass the raptures of the pair;--such theme
  Is, by innumerable poets, touched
  In more delightful verse than skill of mine                      90
  Could fashion; chiefly by that darling bard
  Who told of Juliet and her Romeo,
  And of the lark's note heard before its time,
  And of the streaks that laced the severing clouds
  In the unrelenting east.--Through all her courts                 95
  The vacant city slept; the busy winds,
  That keep no certain intervals of rest,
  Moved not; meanwhile the galaxy displayed
  Her fires, that like mysterious pulses beat
  Aloft;--momentous but uneasy bliss!                             100
  To their full hearts the universe seemed hung
  On that brief meeting's slender filament!

    They parted; and the generous Vaudracour
  Reached speedily the native threshold, bent
  On making (so the Lovers had agreed)                            105
  A sacrifice of birthright to attain
  A final portion from his father's hand;
  Which granted, Bride and Bridegroom then would flee
  To some remote and solitary place,
  Shady as night, and beautiful as heaven,                        110
  Where they may live, with no one to behold
  Their happiness, or to disturb their love.
  But _now_ of this no whisper; not the less,
  If ever an obtrusive word were dropped
  Touching the matter of his passion, still,                      115
  In his stern father's hearing, Vaudracour
  Persisted openly that death alone
  Should abrogate his human privilege
  Divine, of swearing everlasting truth,
  Upon the altar, to the Maid he loved.                           120

    "You shall be baffled in your mad intent
  If there be justice in the court of France,"
  Muttered the Father.--From these words the Youth [4]
  Conceived a terror; and, by night or day,
  Stirred nowhere without weapons, that full soon                 125
  Found dreadful provocation: for at night [5]
  When to his chamber he retired, attempt
  Was made to seize him by three armed men,
  Acting, in furtherance of the father's will,
  Under a private signet of the State.                            130
  One the rash Youth's ungovernable hand
  Slew, and as quickly to a second gave [6]
  A perilous wound--he shuddered to behold
  The breathless corse; then peacefully resigned
  His person to the law, was lodged in prison,                    135
  And wore the fetters of a criminal.

    Have you observed [7] a tuft of winged seed
  That, from the dandelion's naked stalk,
  Mounted aloft, is suffered not to use
  Its natural gifts for purposes of rest,                         140
  Driven by the autumnal whirlwind to and fro
  Through the wide element? or have you marked
  The heavier substance of a leaf-clad bough,
  Within the vortex of a foaming flood,
  Tormented? by such aid you may conceive                         145
  The perturbation that ensued; [8]--ah, no!
  Desperate the Maid--the Youth is stained with blood;
  Unmatchable on earth is their disquiet! [9]
  Yet [10] as the troubled seed and tortured bough
  Is Man, subjected to despotic sway.                             150

    For him, by private influence with the Court,
  Was pardon gained, and liberty procured;
  But not without exaction of a pledge,
  Which liberty and love dispersed in air.
  He flew to her from whom they would divide him--155
  He clove to her who could not give him peace--
  Yea, his first word of greeting was,--"All right
  Is gone from me; my lately-towering hopes,
  To the least fibre of their lowest root,
  Are withered; thou no longer canst be mine,                     160
  I thine--the conscience-stricken must not woo
  The unruffled Innocent,--I see thy face,
  Behold thee, and my misery is complete!"

    "One, are we not?" exclaimed the Maiden--"One,
  For innocence and youth, for weal and woe?"                     165
  Then with the father's name she coupled words
  Of vehement indignation; but the Youth
  Checked her with filial meekness; for no thought
  Uncharitable crossed his mind, no sense
  Of hasty anger rising in the eclipse [11]                       170
  Of true domestic loyalty, did e'er
  Find place within his bosom.--Once again
  The persevering wedge of tyranny
  Achieved their separation: and once more
  Were they united,--to be yet again                              175
  Disparted, pitiable lot! But here
  A portion of the tale may well be left
  In silence, though my memory could add
  Much how the Youth, in scanty space of time,
  Was traversed from without; much, too, of thoughts              180
  That occupied his days in solitude
  Under privation and restraint; and what,
  Through dark and shapeless fear of things to come,
  And what, through strong compunction for the past,
  He suffered--breaking down in heart and mind!                   185

    Doomed to a third and last captivity,
  His freedom he recovered on the eve
  Of Julia's travail. When the babe was born,
  Its presence tempted him to cherish schemes
  Of future happiness. "You shall return,                         190
  Julia," said he, "and to your father's house
  Go with the child.--You have been wretched; yet
  The silver shower, whose reckless burthen weighs
  Too heavily upon the lily's head,
  Oft leaves a saving moisture at its root.                       195
  Malice, beholding you, will melt away.
  Go!--'tis a town where both of us were born;
  None will reproach you, for our truth is known;
  And if, amid those once-bright bowers, our fate
  Remain unpitied, pity is not in man.                            200
  With ornaments--the prettiest, nature yields
  Or art can fashion, shall you deck our [12] boy,
  And feed his countenance with your own sweet looks
  Till no one can resist him.--Now, even now,
  I see him sporting on the sunny lawn;                           205
  My father from the window sees him too;
  Startled, as if some new-created thing
  Enriched the earth, or Faery of the woods
  Bounded before him;--but the unweeting Child
  Shall by his beauty win his grandsire's heart                   210
  So that it shall be softened, and our loves
  End happily, as they began!"

                                These gleams
  Appeared but seldom; oftener was he seen
  Propping a pale and melancholy face                             215
  Upon the Mother's bosom; resting thus
  His head upon one breast, while from the other
  The Babe was drawing in its quiet food.
--That pillow is no longer to be thine,
  Fond Youth! that mournful solace now must pass                  220
  Into the list of things that cannot be!
  Unwedded Julia, terror-smitten, hears
  The sentence, by her mother's lip pronounced,
  That dooms her to a convent.--Who shall tell,
  Who dares report, the tidings to the lord                       225
  Of her affections? so they blindly asked
  Who knew not to what quiet depths a weight
  Of agony had pressed the Sufferer down:
  The word, by others dreaded, he can hear
  Composed and silent, without visible sign                       230
  Of even the least emotion. Noting this,
  When the impatient object of his love
  Upbraided him with slackness, he returned
  No answer, only took the mother's hand
  And kissed it; seemingly devoid of pain,                        235
  Or care, that what so tenderly he pressed
  Was a dependant on [13] the obdurate heart
  Of one who came to disunite their lives
  For ever--sad alternative! preferred,
  By the unbending Parents of the Maid,                           240
  To secret 'spousals meanly disavowed.
--So be it!

              In the city he remained
  A season after Julia had withdrawn
  To those religious walls. He, too, departs--245
  Who with him?--even the senseless Little-one.
  With that sole charge he passed the city-gates,
  For the last time, attendant by the side
  Of a close chair, a litter, or sedan,
  In which the Babe was carried. To a hill,                       250
  That rose a brief league distant from the town,
  The dwellers in that house where he had lodged
  Accompanied his steps, by anxious love
  Impelled;--they parted from him there, and stood
  Watching below till he had disappeared                          255
  On the hill top. His eyes he scarcely took,
  Throughout that journey, from the vehicle
  (Slow-moving ark of all his hopes!) that veiled
  The tender infant: and at every inn,
  And under every hospitable tree                                 260
  At which the bearers halted or reposed,
  Laid him with timid care upon his knees,
  And looked, as mothers ne'er were known to look,
  Upon the nursling which his arms embraced.

    This was the manner in which Vaudracour                       265
  Departed with his infant; and thus reached
  His father's house, where to the innocent child
  Admittance was denied. The young man spake
  No word [14] of indignation or reproof,
  But of his father begged, a last request,                       270
  That a retreat might be assigned to him
  Where in forgotten quiet he might dwell,
  With such allowance as his wants required;
  For wishes he had none. To a lodge that stood
  Deep in a forest, with leave given, at the age                  275
  Of four-and-twenty summers he withdrew;
  And thither took with him his motherless Babe, [15]
  And one domestic for their common needs,
  An aged woman. It consoled him here
  To attend upon the orphan, and perform                          280
  Obsequious service to the precious child,
  Which, after a short time, by some mistake
  Or indiscretion of the Father, died.--
  The Tale I follow to its last recess
  Of suffering or of peace, I know not which:                     285
  Theirs be the blame who caused the woe, not mine!

    From this time forth he never shared a smile
  With mortal creature. An Inhabitant
  Of that same town, in which the pair had left
  So lively a remembrance of their griefs,                        290
  By chance of business, coming within reach
  Of his retirement, to the forest lodge
  Repaired, but only found the matron there, [16]
  Who told him that his pains were thrown away,
  For that her Master never uttered word                          295
  To living thing--not even to her.--Behold!
  While they were speaking, Vaudracour approached;
  But, seeing some one near, as on the latch
  Of the garden-gate his hand was laid, he shrunk--[17]
  And, like a shadow, glided out of view.                         300
  Shocked at his savage aspect, from the place
  The visitor retired.

                        Thus lived the Youth
  Cut off from all intelligence with man,
  And shunning even the light of common day;                      305
  Nor could the voice of Freedom, which through France
  Full speedily resounded, public hope,
  Or personal memory of his own deep wrongs,
  Rouse him: but in those solitary shades
  His days he wasted, an imbecile mind!                           310



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  And strangers to content if long apart,
  Or more divided ...                         1820.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Was inwardly prepared to turn aside
  From law and custom, ...                    1820.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  The sequel may be easily divined,--1820.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  ... From this time the Youth                1820.]


[Variant 5:

1827.

  Stirred no where without arms. To their rural seat,
  Meanwhile, his Parents artfully withdrew,
  Upon some feigned occasion, and the Son
  Remained with one attendant. At midnight         1820.]


[Variant 6:

1836.

  One, did the Youth's ungovernable hand
  Assault and slay;--and to a second gave          1820.]


[Variant 7:

1836.

  ... beheld ...           1820.]


[Variant 8:

1836.

  The perturbation of each mind;--...           1820.]


[Variant 9: This line was added in 1836.]


[Variant 10:

1836.

  But ...            1820.]


[Variant 11:

1845.

  ... for no thought
  Uncharitable, no presumptuous rising
  Of hasty censure, modelled in the eclipse             1820.

  ... for no thought
  Undutifully harsh dwelt in his mind,
  No proud resentment cherished in the eclipse          C.]


[Variant 12:

1840.

  ... your ...              1820.]


[Variant 13:

1827.

  ... upon ...                1820.]


[Variant 14:

1836.

  No words ...       1820.]


[Variant 15:

1836.

  ... infant Babe,   1820.]


[Variant 16:

1827.

  ... to the spot repaired
  With an intent to visit him. He reached
  The house, and only found the Matron there,      1820]


[Variant 17:

1836.

  But, seeing some one near, even as his hand
  Was stretched towards the garden gate, he shrunk--1820]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The work was 'The Prelude'. See book ix., p. 310 of this
volume.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare 'The Prelude', book ix. l. 548, p. 310, where
Wordsworth says it was told him "by my Patriot friend."--Ed.]



In the preface to his volume, "'Poems of Wordsworth' chosen and edited
by Matthew Arnold," that distinguished poet and critic has said (p.
xxv.), "I can read with pleasure and edification ... everything of
Wordsworth, I think, except 'Vaudracour and Julia'."--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





1805


During 1805, the autobiographical poem, which was afterwards named by
Mrs. Wordsworth 'The Prelude', was finished. In that year also
Wordsworth wrote the 'Ode to Duty', 'To a Sky-Lark', 'Fidelity', the
fourth poem 'To the Daisy', the 'Elegiac Stanzas suggested by a Picture
of Peele Castle in a Storm', the 'Elegiac Verses' in memory of his
brother John, 'The Waggoner', and a few other poems.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





FRENCH REVOLUTION,

AS IT APPEARED TO ENTHUSIASTS AT ITS COMMENCEMENT

REPRINTED FROM 'THE FRIEND'


Composed 1805.--Published 1809


[An extract from the long poem on my own poetical education. It was
first published by Coleridge in his 'Friend', which is the reason of its
having had a place in every edition of my poems since.--I. F.]

These lines appeared first in 'The Friend', No. 11, October 26, 1809, p.
163. They afterwards found a place amongst the "Poems of the
Imagination," in all the collective editions from 1815 onwards. They are
part of the eleventh book of 'The Prelude', entitled "France--
(concluded)," ll. 105-144. Wordsworth gives the date 1805, but these
lines possibly belong to the year 1804.--Ed.




  Oh! pleasant exercise of hope and joy!
  For mighty were [1] the auxiliars which then stood
  Upon our side, we [2] who were strong in love!
  Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive,
  But to be young was very heaven!--Oh! times,                     5
  In which the meagre, stale, forbidding ways
  Of custom, law, and statute, took at once
  The attraction of a country in romance!
  When Reason seemed the most to assert her rights,
  When most intent on making of herself                           10
  A prime Enchantress [3]--to assist the work,
  Which then was going forward in her name!
  Not favoured spots alone, but the whole earth,
  The beauty wore of promise, that which sets
  (As at some moment might not be unfelt [4]                      15
  Among the bowers of paradise itself)
  The budding rose above the rose full blown.
  What temper at the prospect did not wake
  To happiness unthought of? The inert
  Were roused, and lively natures rapt away!                      20
  They who had fed their childhood upon dreams,
  The playfellows of fancy, who had made
  All powers of swiftness, subtilty, and strength
  Their ministers,--who in lordly wise had stirred [5]
  Among the grandest objects of the sense,                        25
  And dealt [6] with whatsoever they found there
  As if they had within some lurking right
  To wield it;--they, too, who, of gentle mood,
  Had watched all gentle motions, and to these
  Had fitted their own thoughts, schemers more mild,              30
  And in the region of their peaceful selves;--
  Now was it that both [7] found, the meek and lofty
  Did both find, helpers to their heart's desire,
  And stuff at hand, plastic as they could wish;
  Were called upon to exercise their skill,                       35
  Not in Utopia, subterranean [8] fields,
  Or some secreted island, Heaven knows where!
  But in the very world, which is the world
  Of all of us,--the place where in the end
  We find our happiness, or not at all!                           40



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1: "were" omitted from the 1820 edition only.]


[Variant 2:

1809.

  ... us ...        'The Prelude', 1850.]


[Variant 3:

1815.

  ... Enchanter ...    1809.]


[Variant 4:

1832.

  (To take an image which was felt no doubt        1809.

  (As at some moments might not be unfelt          'The Prelude', 1850.]


[Variant 5:

1815.

  Their ministers--used to stir in lordly wise      1809.]


[Variant 6:

1815.

  And deal ...     1809.]


[Variant 7: "both" 'italicised' from 1815 to 1832, and also in 'The
Prelude'.]


[Variant 8:

1832

    ... subterraneous ...            1809.]



Compare Coleridge's remarks in 'The Friend', vol. ii. p. 38, before
quoting this poem,

  "My feelings and imagination did not remain unkindled in this general
  conflagration; and I confess I should be more inclined to be ashamed
  than proud of myself if they had! I was a sharer in the general
  vortex, though my little world described the path of its revolution in
  an orbit of its own," etc.

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





ODE TO DUTY


Composed 1805.--Published 1807


  "Jam non consilio bonus, sed more eo perductus, ut non tantum recte
  facere possim, sed nisi recte facere non possim." [A]

[This Ode is on the model of Gray's 'Ode to Adversity', which
is copied from Horace's Ode to Fortune. Many and many a
time have I been twitted by my wife and sister for having
forgotten this dedication of myself to the stern law-giver.
Transgressor indeed I have been from hour to hour, from day
to day: I would fain hope, however, not more flagrantly, or
in a worse way than most of my tuneful brethren. But these
last words are in a wrong strain. We should be rigorous to
ourselves, and forbearing, if not indulgent, to others; and, if
we make comparison at all, it ought to be with those who have
morally excelled us.--I. F.]

In pencil on the MS.,

  "But is not the first stanza of Gray's from a chorus of AEschylus? And
  is not Horace's Ode also modelled on the Greek?"

This poem was placed by Wordsworth among his "Poems of Sentiment and
Reflection."--Ed.




  Stern Daughter of the Voice of God!
  O Duty! if that name thou love
  Who art a light to guide, a rod
  To check the erring, and reprove;
  Thou, who art victory and law                                        5
  When empty terrors overawe;
  From vain temptations dost set free;
  And calm'st the weary strife of frail humanity! [1]

  There are who ask not if thine eye
  Be on them; who, in love and truth,                                 10
  Where no misgiving is, rely
  Upon the genial sense of youth: [B]
  Glad Hearts! without reproach or blot;
  Who do thy work, [2] and know it not:
  Oh, if through confidence misplaced                                 15
  They fail, thy saving arms, dread Power! around them cast. [3]

  Serene will be our days and bright,
  And happy will our nature be,
  When love is an unerring light,
  And joy its own security.                                           20
  And they a blissful course may hold
  Even now, who, not unwisely bold, [4]
  Live in the spirit of this creed;
  Yet seek thy firm support, [5] according to their need.

  I, loving freedom, and untried;                                     25
  No sport of every random gust,
  Yet being to myself a guide,
  Too blindly have reposed my trust:
  And oft, when in my heart was heard
  Thy timely mandate, I deferred                                      30
  The task, in smoother walks to stray; [6]
  But thee I now [7] would serve more strictly, if I may.

  Through no disturbance of my soul,
  Or strong compunction in me wrought,
  I supplicate for thy control;                                       35
  But in the quietness of thought:
  Me this unchartered freedom tires; [C]
  I feel the weight of chance-desires:
  My hopes no more must change their name,
  I long for a repose that [8] ever is the same.                      40
  [9]
  Stern Lawgiver! yet thou dost wear
  The Godhead's most benignant grace;
  Nor know we any thing so [10] fair
  As is the smile upon thy face: [D]
  Flowers laugh before thee on their beds                             45
  And fragrance in thy footing treads; [E]
  Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong;
  And the most ancient heavens, through Thee, are fresh and strong.

  To humbler functions, awful Power!
  I call thee: I myself commend                                       50
  Unto thy guidance from this hour;
  Oh, let my weakness have an end!
  Give unto me, made lowly wise,
  The spirit of self-sacrifice;
  The confidence of reason give;                                      55
  And in the light of truth thy Bondman let me live! [F]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1815

  From strife and from despair; a glorious ministry.      1807.]


[Variant 2:

   ... the right ...        MS.

   ... thy will ...         MS.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  May joy be theirs while life shall last!
  And Thou, if they should totter, teach them to stand fast!      1807.

  Long may the kindly impulse last!
  But Thou, ...                                                   1827.

  And may that genial sense remain, when youth is past.           MS.]


[Variant 4:

1827.

  And bless'd are they who in the main
  This faith, even now, do entertain:              1807.

  Even now this creed do entertain                 MS.

  This holy creed do entertain                     MS.]


[Variant 5:

1845.

  Yet find that other strength,  ...  1807.

  Yet find thy firm support,     ...  1837.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

  Resolved that nothing e'er should press
  Upon my present happiness,
  I shoved unwelcome tasks away;                 1807.

  Full oft, when in my heart was heard
  Thy timely mandate, I deferred
  The task imposed, from day to day;             1815.]


[Variant 7:

  But henceforth I would ...          MS.]


[Variant 8:

 1827.

  ... which ...     1807.]


[Variant 9:

  Yet not the less would I throughout
  Still act according to the voice
  Of my own wish; and feel past doubt
  That my submissiveness was choice:
  Not seeking in the school of pride
  For "precepts over dignified,"
  Denial and restraint I prize
  No farther than they breed a second Will more wise.

Only in the edition of 1807.]


[Variant 10:

  ... more ...     MS.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This motto was added in the edition of 1837.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare S. T. C. in 'The Friend' (edition 1818, vol. iii.
p. 62),

  "Its instinct, its safety, its benefit, its glory is to love, to
  admire, to feel, and to labour."

Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare Churchill's 'Gotham', i. 49:

  'An Englishman in chartered freedom born.'

Ed.]


[Footnote D: Compare in 'Sartor Resartus',

  "Happy he for whom a kind of heavenly sun brightens it [Necessity]
  into a ring of Duty, and plays round it with beautiful prismatic
  refractions."

Ed.]


[Footnote E: Compare Persius, 'Satura', ii. l. 38:

  'Quidquic calcaverit hic, rosa fiat.'

And Ben Jonson, in 'The Sad Shepherd', act I. scene i. ll. 8, 9:

  'And where she went, the flowers took thickest root,
  As she had sow'd them with her odorous foot.'

Also, a similar reference to Aphrodite in Hesiod, 'Theogony', vv. 192
'seq.'--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Compare S. T. C. in 'The Friend' (edition 1818), vol. iii.
p. 64.--Ed.]



Mr. J. R. Tutin has supplied me with the text of a proof copy of the
sheets of the edition of 1807, which was cancelled by Wordsworth, in
which the following stanzas take the place of the first four of that
edition:


  'There are who tread a blameless way
  In purity, and love, and truth,
  Though resting on no better stay
  Than on the genial sense of youth:
  Glad Hearts! without reproach or blot;
  Who do the right, and know it not:
  May joy be theirs while life shall last
  And may a genial sense remain, when youth is past.

  Serene would be our days and bright;
  And happy would our nature be;
  If Love were an unerring light;
  And Joy its own security.
  And bless'd are they who in the main,
  This creed, even now, do entertain,
  Do in this spirit live; yet know
  That Man hath other hopes; strength which elsewhere must grow.

  I, loving freedom, and untried;
  No sport of every random gust,
  Yet being to myself a guide,
  Too blindly have reposed my trust;
  Resolv'd that nothing e'er should press
  Upon my present happiness,
  I shov'd unwelcome tasks away:
  But henceforth I would serve; and strictly if I may.

  O Power of DUTY! sent from God
  To enforce on earth his high behest,
  And keep us faithful to the road
  Which conscience hath pronounc'd the best:
  Thou, who art Victory and Law
  When empty terrors overawe;
  From vain temptations dost set free,
  From Strife, and from Despair, a glorious Ministry! [G]'

Ed.


[Footnote G: In the original MS. sent to the printer, I find that this
stanza was transcribed by Coleridge.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TO A SKY-LARK


Composed 1805.--Published 1807


[Rydal Mount, 1825. [A]--I. F.]

In pencil opposite,

  "Where there are no skylarks; but the poet is everywhere."

In the edition of 1807 this is No. 2 of the "Poems, composed during a
Tour, chiefly on foot." [B] In 1815 it became one of the "Poems of the
Fancy."--Ed.




  Up with me! up with me into the clouds!
      For thy song, Lark, is strong;
  Up with me, up with me into the clouds!
        Singing, singing,
  With clouds and sky [1] about thee ringing,                        5
      Lift me, guide me till I find
  That spot which seems so to thy mind!

  I have walked through wildernesses dreary,
  And [2] to-day my heart is weary;
  Had I now the wings [3] of a Faery,                               10
  Up to thee would I fly.
  There is madness about thee, and joy divine
  In that song of thine;
  Lift me, guide me high and high [4]
  To thy banqueting-place in the sky.                               15

          Joyous as morning, [5]
  Thou art laughing and scorning;
  Thou hast a nest for thy love and thy rest,
  And, though little troubled with sloth,
  Drunken Lark! thou would'st be loth                               20
  To be such a traveller as I.
  Happy, happy Liver,
  With a soul as strong as a mountain river
  Pouring out praise to the almighty Giver,
      Joy and jollity be with us both!                              25

  Alas! my journey, rugged and uneven,
  Through prickly moors or dusty ways must wind;
  But hearing thee, or others of thy kind,
  As full of gladness and as free of heaven,
  I, with my fate contented, will plod on,                          30
  And hope for higher raptures, when life's day is done. [6]



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  With all the heav'ns ...    1807]


[Variant 2:

  But ...    MS.]


[Variant 3:

1815.

  the soul ...    1807.]


[Variant 4:

1832.

  Up with me, up with me, high and high, ...    1807.]


[Variant 5: This and the previous stanza were omitted in the edition of
1827, but restored in that of 1832.]


[Variant 6:

1827.

    Joy and jollity be with us both!
    Hearing thee, or else some other,
        As merry a Brother,
  I on the earth will go plodding on,
  By myself, chearfully, till the day is done.     1807.

  What though my course be rugged and uneven,
  To prickly moors and dusty ways confined,
  Yet, hearing thee, or others of thy kind,
  As full of gladness and as free of heaven,
  I on the earth will go plodding on,
  By myself, cheerfully, till the day is done.     1820.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: So it is printed in the 'Prose Works of Wordsworth' (1876);
but the date was 1805.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: In a MS. copy this series is called "Poems composed 'for
amusement' during a Tour, chiefly on foot."--Ed.]



Compare this poem with Shelley's 'Skylark', and with Wordsworth's poem,
on the same subject, written in the year 1825, and the last five stanzas
of his 'Morning Exercise' written in 1827; also with William Watson's
'First Skylark of Spring', 1895.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





FIDELITY


Composed 1805.--Published 1807


[The young man whose death gave occasion to this poem was named Charles
Gough, and had come early in the spring to Patterdale for the sake of
angling. While attempting to cross over Helvellyn to Grasmere he slipped
from a steep part of the rock where the ice was not thawed, and
perished. His body was discovered as described in this poem. Walter
Scott heard of the accident, and both he and I, without either of us
knowing that the other had taken up the subject, each wrote a poem in
admiration of the dog's fidelity. His contains a most beautiful stanza:

  "How long did'st thou think that his silence was slumber!
  When the wind waved his garment how oft did'st thou start!"

I will add that the sentiment in the last four lines of the last stanza
of my verses was uttered by a shepherd with such exactness, that a
traveller, who afterwards reported his account in print, was induced to
question the man whether he had read them, which he had not.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.




  A barking sound the Shepherd hears,
  A cry as of a dog or fox;
  He halts--and searches with his eyes
  Among the scattered rocks:
  And now at distance can discern                          5
  A stirring in a brake of fern;
  And instantly a dog is seen,
  Glancing through that covert green. [1]

  The Dog is not of mountain breed;
  Its motions, too, are wild and shy;                     10
  With something, as the Shepherd thinks,
  Unusual in its cry:
  Nor is there any one in sight
  All round, in hollow or on height;
  Nor shout, nor whistle strikes his ear;                 15
  What is the creature doing here?

  It was a cove, a huge recess,
  That keeps, till June, December's snow;
  A lofty precipice in front,
  A silent tarn [A] below! [B]                            20
  Far in the bosom of Helvellyn,
  Remote from public road or dwelling,
  Pathway, or cultivated land;
  From trace of human foot or hand.

  There sometimes doth [2] a leaping fish                 25
  Send through the tarn a lonely cheer;
  The crags repeat the raven's croak, [C]
  In symphony austere;
  Thither the rainbow comes--the cloud--
  And mists that spread the flying shroud;                30
  And sunbeams; and the sounding blast,
  That, if it could, would hurry past;
  But that enormous barrier holds [3] it fast.

  Not free from boding thoughts, [4] a while
  The Shepherd stood; then makes his way                  35
  O'er rocks and stones, following the Dog [5]
  As quickly as he may;
  Nor far had gone before he found
  A human skeleton on the ground;
  The appalled Discoverer with a sigh [6]                 40
  Looks round, to learn the history.

  From those abrupt and perilous rocks
  The Man had fallen, that place of fear!
  At length upon the Shepherd's mind
  It breaks, and all is clear:                            45
  He instantly recalled the name, [7]
  And who he was, and whence he came;
  Remembered, too, the very day
  On which the Traveller passed this way.

  But hear a wonder, for whose sake                       50
  This lamentable tale I tell! [8]
  A lasting monument of words
  This wonder merits well.
  The Dog, which still was hovering nigh,
  Repeating the same timid cry,                           55
  This Dog, had been through three months' space
  A dweller in that savage place.

  Yes, proof was plain that, since the day
  When this ill-fated Traveller died, [9]
  The Dog had watched about the spot,                     60
  Or by his master's side:
  How nourished here through such long time
  He knows, who gave that love sublime;
  And gave that strength of feeling, great
  Above all human estimate!                               65



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1820.

  From which immediately leaps out
  A Dog, and yelping runs about.      1807.

  And instantly a Dog is seen,
  Glancing from that covert green.    1815.]



[Variant 2:

1820.

  ... does ...    1807.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  binds     1807.]


[Variant 4:

1815.

  Not knowing what to think     1807.]


[Variant 5:

1837.

  Towards the Dog, o'er rocks and stones,     1807.]


[Variant 6:

1815.

  Sad sight! the Shepherd with a sigh     1807.]


[Variant 7:

  And signs and circumstances dawned
  Till everything was clear;
  He made discovery of his name.     MS.]


[Variant 8:

1815.

  But hear a wonder now, for sake
  Of which this mournful Tale I tell!     1807.]


[Variant 9:

1827.

  On which the Traveller thus had died     1807.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Tarn is a _small_ Mere or Lake mostly high up in the
mountains,--W. W.]

[Footnote B: Compare the reference to Helvellyn, and its "deep coves,
shaped by skeleton arms," in the 'Musings near Aquapendente' (1837).
Wordsworth here describes Red Tarn, under Helvellyn, to the east; but
Charles Gough was killed on the Kepplecove side of Swirell Edge, and not
at Red Tarn. Bishop Watson of Llandaff, writing to Hayley (see
'Anecdotes of the Life of Bishop Watson', p. 440), writes about Charles
Gouche (evidently Gough). He had been lodging at "the Cherry Inn," near
Wytheburn, sometime before his death.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare 'The Excursion', book iv. ll. 1185-94.--Ed.]



Thomas Wilkinson--referred to in the notes to 'The Solitary Reaper',
vol. ii. pp. 399, 400, and the verses 'To the Spade of a Friend', in
vol. iv.--alludes to this incident at some length in his poem, 'Emont
Vale'. Wilkinson attended the funeral of young Gough, and writes of the
incident with feeling, but without inspiration. Gough perished early in
April, and his body was not found till July 22nd, 1805. A reference to
his fate will be found in Lockhart's 'Life of Scott' (vol. ii. p. 274);
also in a letter of Mr. Luff of Patterdale, to his wife, July 23rd,
1805. Henry Crabb Robinson records (see his 'Diary, Reminiscences',
etc., vol. ii. p. 25) a conversation with Wordsworth, in which he said
of this poem, that "he purposely made the narrative as prosaic as
possible, in order that no discredit might be thrown on the truth of the
incident."--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





INCIDENT CHARACTERISTIC OF A FAVOURITE DOG [A]


Composed 1805.--Published 1807


[This dog I knew well. It belonged to Mrs. Wordsworth's brother, Mr.
Thomas Hutchinson, who then lived at Sockburn-on-the-Tees, a beautiful
retired situation, where I used to visit him and his sisters before my
marriage. My sister and I spent many months there after my return from
Germany in 1799--I. F.]

One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.




  On his morning rounds the Master
  Goes to learn how all things fare;
  Searches pasture after pasture,
  Sheep and cattle eyes with care;
  And, for silence or for talk,                                     5
  He hath comrades in his walk;
  Four dogs, each pair of different breed,
  Distinguished two for scent, and two for speed.

  See a hare before him started!
--Off they fly in earnest chase;                                 10
  Every dog is eager-hearted,
  All the four are in the race:
  And the hare whom they pursue,
  Knows from instinct [1] what to do;
  Her hope is near: no turn she makes;                             15
  But, like an arrow, to the river takes.

  Deep the river was, and crusted
  Thinly by a one night's frost;
  But the nimble Hare hath trusted
  To the ice, and safely crost; so                                 20
  She hath crost, and without heed
  All are following at full speed,
  When, lo! the ice, so thinly spread,
  Breaks--and the greyhound, DART, is over-head!

  Better fate have PRINCE and SWALLOW--25
  See them cleaving to the sport!
  MUSIC has no heart to follow,
  Little MUSIC, she stops short.
  She hath neither wish nor heart,
  Hers is now another part:                                        30
  A loving creature she, and brave!
  And fondly strives [2] her struggling friend to save.

  From the brink her paws she stretches,
  Very hands as you would say!
  And afflicting moans she fetches,                                35
  As he breaks the ice away.
  For herself she hath no fears,--
  Him alone she sees and hears,--
  Makes efforts with complainings; nor gives o'er
  Until her fellow sinks to re-appear no more. [3]                 40



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  Hath an instinct ...         1807.]


[Variant 2:

1815.

  And doth her best ...      1807.]


[Variant 3:

1837.

  Makes efforts and complainings; nor gives o'er
  Until her Fellow sunk, and reappear'd no more.      1807.

  ... sank, ...                                       1820.]



       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: In 1807 and 1815 the title was 'Incident, Characteristic of
a favourite Dog, which belonged to a Friend of the Author'.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF THE SAME DOG


Composed 1805.--Published 1807


[Was written at the same time, 1805. The Dog Music died, aged and blind,
by falling into a draw-well at Gallow] Hill, to the great grief of the
family of the Hutchinsons, who, as has been before mentioned, had
removed to that place from Sockburn.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems of Sentiment and Reflection."--Ed.




  Lie [1] here, without a record of thy worth,
  Beneath a [2] covering of the common earth!
  It is not from unwillingness to praise,
  Or want of love, that here no Stone we raise;
  More thou deserv'st; but _this_ man gives to man,                    5
  Brother to brother, _this_ is all we can.
  Yet [3] they to whom thy virtues made thee dear
  Shall find thee through all changes of the year:
  This Oak points out thy grave; the silent tree
  Will gladly stand a monument of thee.                               10

    We grieved for thee, and wished thy end were past; [4]
  And willingly have laid thee here at last:
  For thou hadst lived till every thing that cheers
  In thee had yielded to the weight of years;
  Extreme old age had wasted thee away,                               15
  And left thee but a glimmering of the day;
  Thy ears were deaf, and feeble were thy knees,--
  I saw thee stagger in the summer breeze,
  Too weak to stand against its sportive breath,
  And ready for the gentlest stroke of death.                         20
  It came, and we were glad; yet tears were shed;
  Both man and woman wept when thou wert dead;
  Not only for a thousand thoughts that were,
  Old household thoughts, in which thou hadst thy share;
  But for some precious boons vouchsafed to thee,                     25
  Found scarcely any where in like degree!
  For love, that comes wherever life and sense
  Are given by God, in thee was most intense; [5]
  A chain of heart, a feeling of the mind,
  A tender sympathy, which did thee bind                              30
  Not only to us Men, but to thy Kind:
  Yea, for thy fellow-brutes in thee we saw
  A soul [6] of love, love's intellectual law:--
  Hence, if we wept, it was not done in shame;
  Our tears from passion and from reason came,                        35
  And, therefore, shalt thou be an honoured name!



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1: In the editions of 1807 to 1820 the following lines began
the poem. They were withdrawn in 1827.

  Lie here sequester'd:--be this little mound
  For ever thine, and be it holy ground!]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Beneath the ...    1807.]


[Variant 3:

  But ...    MS.]


[Variant 4:

1837.

  I pray'd for thee, and that thy end were past;       1807.

  I grieved for thee, and wished thy end were past;    1820.]


[Variant 5:

1837.

  For love, that comes to all; the holy sense,
  Best gift of God, in thee was most intense;    1807.]


[Variant 6:

1837.

  The soul ...    1807.]





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE DAISY (#4)


Composed 1805.--Published 1815


Placed by Wordsworth among his "Epitaphs and Elegiac Pieces."--Ed.




  Sweet Flower! belike one day to have
  A place upon thy Poet's grave,
  I welcome thee once more:
  But He, who was on land, at sea,
  My Brother, too, in loving thee,                        5
  Although he loved more silently,
  Sleeps by his native shore.

  Ah! hopeful, hopeful was the day
  When to that Ship he bent his way,
  To govern and to guide:                                10
  His wish was gained: a little time
  Would bring him back in manhood's prime
  And free for life, these hills to climb;
  With all his wants supplied.

  And full of hope day followed day                      15
  While that stout Ship at anchor lay
  Beside the shores of Wight;
  The May had then made all things green;
  And, floating there, in pomp serene,
  That Ship was goodly to be seen,                       20
  His pride and his delight!

  Yet then, when called ashore, he sought
  The tender peace of rural thought:
  In more than happy mood
  To your abodes, bright daisy Flowers!                  25
  He then would steal at leisure hours,
  And loved you glittering in your bowers,
  A starry multitude.

  But hark the word!--the ship is gone;--
  Returns from her long course: [1]--anon                30
  Sets sail:--in season due,
  Once more on English earth they stand:
  But, when a third time from the land
  They parted, sorrow was at hand
  For Him and for his crew.                              35

  Ill-fated Vessel!--ghastly shock!
  --At length delivered from the rock,
  The deep she hath regained;
  And through the stormy night they steer;
  Labouring for life, in hope and fear,                  40
  To reach a safer shore [2]--how near,
  Yet not to be attained!

  "Silence!" the brave Commander cried;
  To that calm word a shriek replied,
  It was the last death-shriek.                          45
  --A few (my soul oft sees that sight)
  Survive upon the tall mast's height; [3]
  But one dear remnant of the night--
  For Him in vain I seek.

  Six weeks beneath the moving sea                       50
  He lay in slumber quietly;
  Unforced by wind or wave
  To quit the Ship for which he died,
  (All claims of duty satisfied;)
  And there they found him at her side;                  55
  And bore him to the grave.

  Vain service! yet not vainly done
  For this, if other end were none,
  That He, who had been cast
  Upon a way of life unmeet                              60
  For such a gentle Soul and sweet,
  Should find an undisturbed retreat
  Near what he loved, at last--

  That neighbourhood of grove and field
  To Him a resting-place should yield,                   65
  A meek man and a brave!
  The birds shall sing and ocean make
  A mournful murmur for _his_ sake;
  And Thou, sweet Flower, shalt sleep and wake
  Upon his senseless grave. [4]                          70



       *       *       *       *       *


VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1837.

  From her long course returns:--...    1815.]


[Variant 2:

1837.

  Towards a safer shore--...    1815.]


[Variant 3:

1837

--A few appear by morning light,
  Preserved upon the tall mast's height:
  Oft in my Soul I see that sight;        1815.]


[Variant 4: In the edition of 1827 and subsequent ones, Wordsworth here
inserted a footnote, asking the reader to refer to No. VI. of the "Poems
on the Naming of Places," beginning "When, to the attractions of the
busy world," p. 66. His note of 1837 refers also to the poem which there
precedes the present one, viz. the 'Elegiac Stanzas.'--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





ELEGIAC STANZAS [A]

SUGGESTED BY A PICTURE OF PEELE CASTLE, IN A STORM,
PAINTED BY SIR GEORGE BEAUMONT


Composed 1805.--Published 1807


[Sir George Beaumont painted two pictures of this subject, one of which
he gave to Mrs. Wordsworth, saying she ought to have it; but Lady
Beaumont interfered, and after Sir George's death she gave it to Sir
Uvedale Price, at whose house at Foxley I have seen it.--I. F.]

Placed by Wordsworth among his "Epitaphs and Elegiac Pieces."--Ed.




  I was thy neighbour once, thou rugged Pile!
  Four summer weeks I dwelt in sight of thee:
  I saw thee every day; and all the while
  Thy Form was sleeping on a glassy sea.

  So pure the sky, so quiet was the air!                         5
  So like, so very like, was day to day!
  Whene'er I looked, thy Image still was there;
  It trembled, but it never passed away.

  How perfect was the calm! it seemed no sleep;
  No mood, which season takes away, or brings:                  10
  I could have fancied that the mighty Deep
  Was even the gentlest of all gentle Things.

  Ah! THEN, if mine had been the Painter's hand,
  To express what then I saw; and add the gleam,
  The light that never was, on sea or land,                     15
  The consecration, and the Poet's dream; [1]

  I would have planted thee, thou hoary Pile
  Amid a world how different from this!
  Beside a sea that could not cease to smile;
  On tranquil land, beneath a sky of bliss.                     20

  Thou shouldst have seemed a treasure-house divine [2]
  Of peaceful years; a chronicle of heaven;--
  Of all the sunbeams that did ever shine
  The very sweetest had to thee been given.

  A Picture had it been of lasting ease,                        25
  Elysian quiet, without toil or strife;
  No motion but the moving tide, a breeze,
  Or merely silent Nature's breathing life.

  Such, in the fond illusion [3] of my heart,
  Such Picture would I at that time have made:                  30
  And seen the soul of truth in every part,
  A stedfast peace that might not be betrayed. [4]

  So once it would have been,--'tis so no more;
  I have submitted to a new control:
  A power is gone, which nothing can restore;                   35
  A deep distress hath humanised my Soul.

  Not for a moment could I now behold
  A smiling sea, and be what I have been:
  The feeling of my loss will ne'er be old;
  This, which I know, I speak with mind serene.                 40

  Then, Beaumont, Friend! who would have been the Friend,
  If he had lived, of Him whom I deplore,
  This work of thine I blame not, but commend;
  This sea in anger, and that dismal shore.

  O 'tis a passionate Work!--yet wise and well,                 45
  Well chosen is the spirit that is here;
  That Hulk which labours in the deadly swell,
  This rueful sky, this pageantry of fear!

  And this huge Castle, standing here sublime,
  1 love to see the look with which it braves,                  50
  Cased in the unfeeling armour of old time,
  The lightning, the fierce wind, and trampling waves.

  Farewell, farewell the heart that lives alone,
  Housed in a dream, at distance from the Kind!
  Such happiness, wherever it be known,                         55
  Is to be pitied; for 'tis surely blind.

  But welcome fortitude, and patient cheer,
  And frequent sights of what is to be borne!
  Such sights, or worse, as are before me here.--
  Not without hope we suffer and we mourn.                      60


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

                and add a gleam,
  The lustre, known to neither sea nor land,
  But borrowed from the youthful Poet's dream;      1820.

  ... the gleam,                                    1827.

The edition of 1832 returns to the text of 1807. [a]]


[Variant 2:

1845.

  ... a treasure-house, a mine        1807.

The whole of this stanza was omitted in the editions of 1820-1843.]


[Variant 3:

1815.

  ... delusion ...       1807.]


[Variant 4:

1837.

  A faith, a trust, that could not be betray'd.      1807.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The original title, in MS, was 'Verses suggested',
etc,--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: Many years ago Principal Shairp wrote to me,

  "Have you noted how the two lines, 'The light that never was,' etc.,
  stood in the edition of 1827? I know no other such instance of a
  change from commonplace to perfection of ideality."

The Principal had not remembered at the time that the "perfection of
ideality" was in the original edition of 1807. The curious thing is that
the prosaic version of 1820 and 1827 ever took its place. Wordsworth's
return to his original reading was one of the wisest changes he
introduced into the text of 1832.--Ed.]



There is a Peele Castle, on a small rocky island, close to the town of
Peele, in the Isle of Man; yet separated from it, much as St. Michael's
Mount in Cornwall is separated from the mainland. This castle was
believed by many to be the one which Sir George painted, and which gave
rise to the foregoing lines. I visited it in 1879, being then ignorant
that any other Peele Castle existed; and although, the day being calm,
and the season summer, I thought Sir George had idealized his subject
much--(as I had just left Coleorton, where the picture still exists)--I
accepted the customary opinion. But I am now convinced, both from the
testimony of the Arnold family, [B] and as the result of a visit to Piel
Castle, near Barrow in Furness, that Wordsworth refers to it. The late
Bishop of Lincoln, in his uncle's 'Memoirs' (vol. i. p. 299), quotes the
line

  "I was thy neighbour once, thou rugged pile,"

and adds,

  "He had spent four weeks there of a college summer vacation at the
  house of his cousin, Mr. Barker."

This house was at Rampside, the village opposite Piel, on the coast of
Lancashire. The "rugged pile," too, now "cased in the unfeeling armour
of old time," painted by Beaumont, is obviously this Piel Castle near
Barrow. I took the engraving of his picture with me, when visiting it:
and although Sir George--after the manner of landscape artists of his
day--took many liberties with his subjects, it is apparent that it was
this, and not Peele Castle in Mona, that he painted. The "four summer
weeks" referred to in the first stanza, were those spent at Piel during
the year 1794.

With the last verse of these 'Elegiac Stanzas' compare stanzas ten and
eleven of the 'Ode, Intimations of Immortality', vol. viii.

One of the two pictures of "Peele Castle in a Storm"--engraved by S. W.
Reynolds, and published in the editions of Wordsworth's poems of 1815
and 1820--is still in the Beaumont Gallery at Coleorton Hall.

The poem is so memorable that I have arranged to make this picture of
"Peele Castle in a Storm," the vignette to vol. xv. of this edition. It
deserves to be noted that it was to the pleading of Barron Field that we
owe the restoration of the original line of 1807,

  'The light that never was, on sea or land.'

An interesting account of Piel Castle will be found in Hearne and
Byrne's 'Antiquities'. It was built by the Abbot of Furness in the first
year of the reign of Edward III.--Ed.


[Footnote B: Miss Arnold wrote to me, in December 1893:

  "I have never doubted that the Peele Castle of Wordsworth is the Piel
  off Walney Island. I know that my brother Matthew so believed, and I
  went with him some years ago from Furness Abbey over to Piel, visiting
  it as the subject of the picture and the poem."

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





ELEGIAC VERSES,

IN MEMORY OF MY BROTHER, JOHN WORDSWORTH, COMMANDER OF THE E. I.
COMPANY'S SHIP, 'THE EARL OF ABERGAVENNY', IN WHICH HE PERISHED BY
CALAMITOUS SHIPWRECK, FEB. 6TH, 1805.


Composed near the Mountain track, that leads from Grasmere through
Grisdale Hawes, where it descends towards Patterdale.

Composed 1805.--Published 1842

[  "Here did we stop; and here looked round,
   While each into himself descends."

The point is two or three yards below the outlet of Grisedale Tarn, on a
foot-road by which a horse may pass to Patterdale--a ridge of Helvellyn
on the left, and the summit of Fairfield on the right.--I. F.]

This poem was included among the "Epitaphs and Elegiac Pieces."--Ed.




  I        The Sheep-boy whistled loud, and lo!
           That instant, startled by the shock,
           The Buzzard mounted from the rock
           Deliberate and slow:
           Lord of the air, he took his flight;                   5
           Oh! could he on that woeful night
           Have lent his wing, my Brother dear,
           For one poor moment's space to Thee,
           And all who struggled with the Sea,
           When safety was so near.                              10

  II       Thus in the weakness of my heart
           I spoke (but let that pang be still)
           When rising from the rock at will,
           I saw the Bird depart.
           And let me calmly bless the Power                     15
           That meets me in this unknown Flower,
           Affecting type of him I mourn!
           With calmness suffer and believe,
           And grieve, and know that I must grieve,
           Not cheerless, though forlorn.                        20

  III      Here did we stop; and here looked round
           While each into himself descends,
           For that last thought of parting Friends
           That is not to be found.
           Hidden was Grasmere Vale from sight,                  25
           Our home and his, his heart's delight,
           His quiet heart's selected home.
           But time before him melts away,
           And he hath feeling of a day
           Of blessedness to come.                               30

  IV       Full soon in sorrow did I weep,
           Taught that the mutual hope was dust,
           In sorrow, but for higher trust,
           How miserably deep!
           All vanished in a single word,                        35
           A breath, a sound, and scarcely heard.
           Sea--Ship--drowned--Shipwreck--so it came,
           The meek, the brave, the good, was gone;
           He who had been our living John
           Was nothing but a name.                               40

  V        That was indeed a parting! oh,
           Glad am I, glad that it is past;
           For there were some on whom it cast
           Unutterable woe.
           But they as well as I have gains;--45
           From many a humble source, to pains
           Like these, there comes a mild release;
           Even here I feel it, even this Plant
           Is in its beauty ministrant
           To comfort and to peace.                              50

  VI       He would have loved thy modest grace,
           Meek Flower! To Him I would have said,
           "It grows upon its native bed
           Beside our Parting-place;
           There, cleaving to the ground, it lies                55
           With multitude of purple eyes,
           Spangling a cushion green like moss;
           But we will see it, joyful tide!
           Some day, to see it in its pride,
           The mountain will we cross."                          60

  VII--Brother and friend, if verse of mine
           Have power to make thy virtues known,
           Here let a monumental Stone
           Stand--sacred as a Shrine;
           And to the few who pass this way,                     65
           Traveller or Shepherd, let it say,
           Long as these mighty rocks endure,--
           Oh do not Thou too fondly brood,
           Although deserving of all good,
           On any earthly hope, however pure! [A]                70


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: See 2nd vol. of the Author's Poems, page 298, and 5th vol.,
pages 311 and 314, among Elegiac Pieces.--W. W. 1842.

These poems are those respectively beginning:

  "When, to the attractions of the busy world ..."

  "I was thy neighbour once, thou rugged Pile! ..."

  "Sweet Flower! belike one day to have ..."

Ed.


The plant alluded to is the Moss Campion (Silene acaulis, of Linnaeus).
See note at the end of the volume.--W. W. 1842.

See among the "Poems on the Naming of Places," No. VI.--W. W. 1845.

The note is as follows:

  "Moss Campion ('Silene acaulis'). This most beautiful plant is scarce
  in England, though it is found in great abundance upon the mountains
  of Scotland. The first specimen I ever saw of it in its native bed was
  singularly fine, the tuft or cushion being at least eight inches
  diameter, and the root proportionably thick. I have only met with it
  in two places among our mountains, in both of which I have since
  sought for it in vain.

  Botanists will not, I hope, take it ill, if I caution them against
  carrying off inconsiderately rare and beautiful plants. This has often
  been done, particularly from Ingleborough and other mountains in
  Yorkshire, till the species have totally disappeared, to the great
  regret of lovers of nature living near the places where they
  grew."--W. W. 1842.

See also 'The Prelude', book xiv. 1. 419, p. 379.--Ed.]



This poem underwent no change in successive editions.

At a meeting of "The Wordsworth Society" held at Grasmere, in July 1881,
it was proposed by one of the members, the Rev. H. D. Rawnsley, then
Vicar of Wray, to erect some memorial at the parting-place of the
brothers. The brothers John and William Wordsworth parted at Grisedale
Tarn, on the 29th September 1800. The originator of the idea wrote thus
of it in June 1882:

  "A proposition, made by one of its members to the Wordsworth Society
  when it met in Grasmere in 1881, to mark the spot in the Grisedale
  Pass of Wordsworth's parting from his brother John--and to carry out a
  wish the poet seems to have hinted at in the last of his elegiac
  verses in memory of that parting--is now being put into effect. It has
  been determined, after correspondence with Lord Coleridge, Dr.
  Cradock, Professor Knight, and Mr. Hills, to have inscribed--(on the
  native rock, if possible)--the first four lines of Stanzas III. and
  VII. of these verses:

    'Here did we stop; and here looked round
    While each into himself descends,
    For that last thought of parting Friends
    That is not to be found.
    ...
    Brother and friend, if verse of mine
    Have power to make thy virtues known,
    Here let a monumental Stone
    Stand--sacred as a Shrine.'

  The rock selected is a fine mass, facing the east, on the left of the
  track as one descends from Grisedale Tarn towards Patterdale, and is
  about 100 yards from the tarn. No more suitable one can be found, and
  we have the testimony of Mr. David Richardson of Newcastle, who has
  practical knowledge of engineering, that it is the fittest, both from
  shape and from slight incline of plane.

  It has been proposed to sink a panel in the face of the rock, that so
  the inscription may be slightly protected, and to engrave the letters
  upon the face of the panel thus obtained. But it is not quite certain
  yet that the grain of the rock--volcanic ash--will admit of the
  lettering. If this cannot be carried out, it has been determined to
  have the letters engraved upon a slab of Langdale slate, and imbed it
  in the Grisedale Rock.

  It is believed that the simplicity of the design, the lonely isolation
  of this mountain memorial, will appeal at once

    ' ... to the few who pass this way,
    Traveller or Shepherd.'

  And we in our turn appeal to English tourists who may chance to see
  it, to forego the wish of adding to it, or taking anything from it, by
  engraving their own names; and to let the Monumental Stone stand, as
  the poet wished it might

    ' ... stand, SACRED as a Shrine.'

  We owe great thanks to Mrs. Sturge for first surveying the place, to
  ascertain the possibility of finding a mountain rock sufficiently
  striking in position; to Mr. Richardson, jun., for his etching of the
  rock, upon which the inscription is to be made; to his father for the
  kind trouble he took in the measurement of the said rock; and
  particularly to the seconder of the original proposal, and my
  coadjutor in the task of final selection and superintending the work,
  Mr. W. H. Hills.

  H. D. RAWNSLEY.

  _P. S._--When we came to examine the rock, we found the area for the
  panel less than we had hoped for, owing to certain rock fissures,
  which, by acting as drains for the rainwater on the surface, would
  have much interfered with the durability of the inscription. The
  available space for the panel remains 3 feet 7 in length by 1 foot 9
  inches in depth. Owing to the fineness of the grain of the stone, it
  may be quite possible to letter the native rock; but it has been
  difficult to fix on a style of lettering for the inscription that
  shall be at once in good taste, forcible, and plain. It was proposed
  that the Script type of letter which was made use of in the
  inscription cut on the rock, in the late Mr. Ball's garden grounds
  below the Mount at Rydal, should be adopted; but a final decision has
  been given in favour of a style of lettering which Mrs. Rawnsley has
  designed. The panel is, from its position, certain to attract the eye
  of the wanderer from Patterdale up to the Grisedale Pass.

  H. D. R."

See the note to 'The Waggoner', p. 112, referring to the Rock of Names,
on the shore of Thirlmere.

The following extract from 'Recollections from 1803 to 1837, with a
Conclusion in 1868, by the Hon. Amelia Murray' (London: Longmans, Green,
and Co. 1868)--refers to the loss of the 'Abergavenny':

  "One morning, coming down early, I saw what I thought was a great big
  ship without any hull. This was the 'Abergavenny', East Indiaman,
  which had sunk with all sails set, hardly three miles from the shore,
  and all on board perished.

  Had any of the crew taken refuge in the main-top, they might have been
  saved; but the bowsprit, which was crowded with human beings, gave a
  lurch into the sea as the ship settled down, and thus all were washed
  off--though the timber appeared again above water when the
  'Abergavenny' touched the ground. The ship had sprung a leak off St.
  Alban's Head; and in spite of pumps, she went to the bottom just
  within reach of safety."    Pp. 12, 13.

A 'Narrative of the loss of the "Earl of Abergavenny" East Indiaman, off
Portland, Feb. 5, 1805', was published in pamphlet form (8vo, 1805), by
Hamilton and Bird, 21 High Street, Islington.

For much in reference to John Wordsworth, which illustrates both these
'Elegiac Verses', and the poem "On the Naming of Places" which follows
them, I must refer to his 'Life' to be published in another volume of
this series; but there is one letter of Dorothy Wordsworth's, written to
her friend Miss Jane Pollard (afterwards Mrs. Marshall), in reference to
her brother's death, which may find a place here. For the use of it I am
indebted to the kindness of Mrs. Marshall's daughter, the Dowager Lady
Monteagle:

  "March 16th, 1805. Grasmere.

  "... It does me good to weep for him, and it does me good to find that
  others weep, and I bless them for it. ... It is with me, when I write,
  as when I am walking out in this vale, once so full of joy. I can turn
  to no object that does not remind me of our loss. I see nothing that
  he would not have loved, and enjoyed.... My consolations rather come
  to me in gusts of feeling, than are the quiet growth of my mind. I
  know it will not always be so. The time will come when the light of
  the setting sun upon these mountain tops will be as heretofore a pure
  joy; not the same _gladness_, that can never be--but yet a joy even
  more tender. It will soothe me to know how happy he would have been,
  could he have seen the same beautiful spectacle.... He was taken away
  in the freshness of his manhood; pure he was, and innocent as a child.
  Never human being was more thoroughly modest, and his courage I need
  not speak of. He was 'seen speaking with apparent cheerfulness to the
  first mate a few minutes before the ship went down;' and when nothing
  more could be done, He said, 'the will of God be done.' I have no
  doubt when he felt that it was out of his power to save his life he
  was as calm as before, if some thought of what we should endure did
  not awaken a pang.... He loved solitude, and he rejoiced in society.
  He would wander alone amongst these hills with his fishing-rod, or led
  on by the mere pleasure of walking, for many hours; or he would walk
  with W. or me, or both of us, and was continually pointing out--with a
  gladness which is seldom seen but in very young people--something
  which perhaps would have escaped our observation; for he had so fine
  an eye that no distinction was unnoticed by him, and so tender a
  feeling that he never noticed anything in vain. Many a time has he
  called out to me at evening to look at the moon or stars, or a cloudy
  sky, or this vale in the quiet moonlight; but the stars and moon were
  his chief delight. He made of them his companions when he was at sea,
  and was never tired of those thoughts which the silence of the night
  fed in him. Then he was so happy by the fireside. Any little business
  of the house interested him. He loved our cottage. He helped us to
  furnish it, and to make the garden. Trees are growing now which he
  planted.... He staid with us till the 29th of September, having come
  to us about the end of January. During that time Mary Hutchinson--now
  Mary Wordsworth--staid with us six weeks. John used to walk with her
  everywhere, and they were exceedingly attached to each other; so my
  poor sister mourns with us, not merely because we have lost one who
  was so dear to William and me, but from tender love to John and an
  intimate knowledge of him. Her hopes as well as ours were fixed on
  John.... I can think of nothing but of our departed Brother, yet I am
  very tranquil to-day. I honour him, and love him, and glory in his
  memory...."

Southey, writing to his friend, C. W. W. Wynn, on the 3rd of April 1805,
says:

  "DEAR WYNN,

  I have been grievously shocked this evening by the loss of the
  'Abergavenny', of which Wordsworth's brother was captain. Of course
  the news came flying up to us from all quarters, and it has disordered
  me from head to foot. At such circumstances I believe we feel as much
  for others as for ourselves; just as a violent blow occasions the same
  pain as a wound, and he who breaks his shin feels as acutely at the
  moment as the man whose leg is shot off. In fact, I am writing to you
  merely because this dreadful shipwreck has left me utterly unable to
  do anything else. It is the heaviest calamity Wordsworth has ever
  experienced, and in all probability I shall have to communicate it to
  him, as he will very likely be here before the tidings can reach him.
  What renders any near loss of this kind so peculiarly distressing is,
  that the recollection is perpetually freshened when any like event
  occurs, by the mere mention of shipwreck, or the sound of the wind. Of
  all deaths it is the most dreadful, from the circumstances of terror
  which accompany it...."

(See 'The Life and Correspondence of Robert Southey', vol. ii. p. 321.)

The following is part of a letter from Mary Lamb to Dorothy Wordsworth
on the same subject. It is undated:

  "MY DEAR MISS WORDSWORTH,--

  I wished to tell you that you would one day feel the kind of peaceful
  state of mind and sweet memory of the dead, which you so happily
  describe, as now almost begun; but I felt that it was improper, and
  most grating to the feelings of the afflicted, to say to them that the
  memory of their affliction would in time become a constant part, not
  only of their dreams, but of their most wakeful sense of happiness.
  That you would see every object with and through your lost brother,
  and that that would at last become a real and everlasting source of
  comfort to you, I felt, and well knew, from my own experience in
  sorrow; but till you yourself began to feel this, I did not dare to
  tell you so; but I send you some poor lines, which I wrote under this
  conviction of mind, and before I heard Coleridge was returning home.

  ...

    "Why is he wandering on the sea?--
    Coleridge should now with Wordsworth be.
    By slow degrees he'd steal away
    Their woes, and gently bring a ray
    (So happily he'd time relief,)
    Of comfort from their very grief.
    He'd tell them that their brother dead,
    When years have passed o'er their head,
    Will be remembered with such holy,
    True and tender melancholy,
    That ever this lost brother John
    Will be their heart's companion.
    His voice they'll always hear,
      His face they'll always see;
    There's naught in life so sweet
      As such a memory."

(See 'Final Memorials of Charles Lamb', by Thomas Noon Talfourd, vol.
ii. pp. 233, 234.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





"WHEN, TO THE ATTRACTIONS OF THE BUSY WORLD"


Composed 1800 to 1805.--Published 1815


[The grove still exists; but the plantation has been walled in, and is
not so accessible as when my brother John wore the path in the manner
here described. The grove was a favourite haunt with us all while we
lived at Town-end.--I. F.]

This was No. VI. of the "Poems on the Naming of Places." For several
suggested changes in MS. see Appendix I. p. 385.--Ed.




  When, to the attractions of the busy world,
  Preferring studious leisure, I had chosen
  A habitation in this peaceful Vale,
  Sharp season followed of continual storm
  In deepest winter; and, from week to week,                         5
  Pathway, and lane, and public road, were clogged
  With frequent showers of snow. Upon a hill
  At a short distance from my cottage, stands
  A stately Fir-grove, whither I was wont
  To hasten, for I found, beneath the roof                          10
  Of that perennial shade, a cloistral place
  Of refuge, with an unincumbered floor.
  Here, in safe covert, on the shallow snow,
  And, sometimes, on a speck of visible earth,
  The redbreast near me hopped; nor was I loth                      15
  To sympathise with vulgar coppice birds
  That, for protection from the nipping blast,
  Hither repaired.--A single beech-tree grew
  Within this grove of firs! and, on the fork
  Of that one beech, appeared a thrush's nest;                      20
  A last year's nest, conspicuously built
  At such small elevation from the ground
  As gave sure sign that they, who in that house
  Of nature and of love had made their home
  Amid the fir-trees, all the summer long                           25
  Dwelt in a tranquil spot. And oftentimes,
  A few sheep, stragglers from some mountain-flock,
  Would watch my motions with suspicious stare,
  From the remotest outskirts of the grove,--
  Some nook where they had made their final stand,                  30
  Huddling together from two fears--the fear
  Of me and of the storm. Full many an hour
  Here did I lose. But in this grove the trees
  Had been so thickly planted, and had thriven
  In such perplexed and intricate array;                            35
  That vainly did I seek, beneath [1] their stems
  A length of open space, where to and fro
  My feet might move without concern or care;
  And, baffled thus, though earth from day to day
  Was fettered, and the air by storm disturbed,                     40
  I ceased the shelter to frequent, [2]--and prized,
  Less than I wished to prize, that calm recess.

    The snows dissolved, and genial Spring returned
  To clothe the fields with verdure. Other haunts
  Meanwhile were mine; till, one bright April day,                  45
  By chance retiring from the glare of noon
  To this forsaken covert, there I found
  A hoary pathway traced between the trees,
  And winding on with such an easy line
  Along a natural opening, that I stood                             50
  Much wondering how I could have sought in vain [3]
  For what was now so obvious. [4] To abide,
  For an allotted interval of ease,
  Under my cottage-roof, had gladly come
  From the wild sea a cherished Visitant; [5]                       55
  And with the sight of this same path--begun,
  Begun and ended, in the shady grove, [6]
  Pleasant conviction flashed upon my mind [7]
  That, to this opportune recess allured,
  He had surveyed it with a finer eye,                              60
  A heart more wakeful; and had worn the track [8]
  By pacing here, unwearied and alone, [A]
  In that habitual restlessness of foot
  That haunts the Sailor measuring [9] o'er and o'er
  His short domain upon the vessel's deck,                          65
  While she pursues her course [10] through the dreary sea.

  When thou hadst quitted Esthwaite's pleasant shore,
  And taken thy first leave of those green hills
  And rocks that were the play-ground of thy youth,
  Year followed year, my Brother! and we two,                       70
  Conversing not, knew little in what mould
  Each other's mind was fashioned; [11] and at length
  When once again we met in Grasmere Vale,
  Between us there was little other bond
  Than common feelings of fraternal love.                           75
  But thou, a School-boy, to the sea hadst carried
  Undying recollections; Nature there
  Was with thee; she, who loved us both, she still
  Was with thee; and even so didst thou become
  A _silent_ Poet; from the solitude                                80
  Of the vast sea didst bring a watchful heart
  Still couchant, an inevitable ear,
  And an eye practised like a blind man's touch.
--Back to the joyless Ocean thou art gone;
  Nor from this vestige of thy musing hours                         85
  Could I withhold thy honoured name,--and now
  I love the fir-grove [12] with a perfect love.
  Thither do I withdraw when cloudless suns
  Shine hot, or wind blows troublesome and strong;
  And there I sit at evening, when the steep                        90
  Of Silver-how, and Grasmere's peaceful [13] lake,
  And one green island, gleam between the stems
  Of the dark firs, a visionary scene!
  And, while I gaze upon the spectacle
  Of clouded splendour, on this dream-like sight                    95
  Of solemn loveliness, I think on thee,
  My Brother, and on all which thou hast lost.
  Nor seldom, if I rightly guess, while Thou,
  Muttering the verses which I muttered first
  Among the mountains, through the midnight watch                  100
  Art pacing thoughtfully [14] the vessel's deck
  In some far region, here, while o'er my head,
  At every impulse of the moving breeze,
  The fir-grove murmurs with a sea-like sound, [B]
  Alone I tread this path;--for aught I know,                      105
  Timing my steps to thine; and, with a store
  Of undistinguishable sympathies,
  Mingling most earnest wishes for the day
  When we, and others whom we love, shall meet
  A second time, in Grasmere's happy Vale.                         110


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1836.

  ... between ...      1815.]


[Variant 2:

1836.

  And, baffled thus, before the storm relaxed,
  I ceased that Shelter to frequent,--1815.

  ... the shelter ...                       1827.]


[Variant 3:

1827.

  Much wondering at my own simplicity
  How I could e'er have made a fruitless search      1815.]


[Variant 4:

  ... At the sight
  Conviction also flashed upon my mind
  That this same path (within the shady grove
  Begun and ended) by my Brother's steps
  Had been impressed.--...

These additional lines appeared only in 1815 and 1820.]


[Variant 5:

1845.

  ... To sojourn a short while
  Beneath my roof He from the barren seas
  Had newly come--a cherished Visitant!         1815.

  ... To abide,
  For an allotted interval of ease,
  Beneath my cottage roof, had newly come
  From the wild sea a cherished Visitant;       1827.

  Beneath my cottage roof, had gladly come      1840.

  ... had meanwhile come                        C. [a]]


[Variant 6: This and the previous line were added in 1827.]


[Variant 7:

1827.

  And much did it delight me to perceive     1815.]


[Variant 8:

1827.

  A heart more wakeful; that, more both to part
  From place so lovely, he had worn the track     1815.]


[Variant 9:

1845.

  With which the Sailor measures ...     1815.]


[Variant 10:

1845.

  While she is travelling ...      1815.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

  ... minds were fashioned;...     1815.]


[Variant 12:

1827.

  ... art gone;
  And now I call the path-way by thy name,
  And love the fir-grove          1815.]


[Variant 13:

1827.

  ... placid ...       1815.]


[Variant 14:

1827.

  Art pacing to and fro ...       1815.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Daniel's 'Hymens Triumph', ii. 4:

  'And where no sun could see him, where no eye
  Might overlook his lonely privacy;
  There in a path of his own making, trod
  Rare as a common way, yet led no way
  Beyond the turns he made.'

Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare the line in Coleridge's 'Hymn before Sun-rise, in
the Vale of Chamouni':

  'Ye pine groves with your soft and soul-like sound,'

Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: In the late Lord Coleridge's copy of the edition of
1836, there is a footnote in Wordsworth's handwriting to the word
"meanwhile" which is substituted for "newly." "If 'newly' come, could he
have traced a visible path?"--Ed.]



This wish was not granted; the lamented Person, not long after, perished
by shipwreck, in discharge of his duty as Commander of the Honourable
East India Company's Vessel, the 'Earl of Abergavenny'.--W. W. 1815.

For the date of this poem in the Chronological Tables given in the
editions of 1815 and 1820, Wordsworth assigned the year 1802. But, in
the edition of 1836, he assigned it to the year 1805, the date retained
by Mr. Carter in the edition of 1857. Captain Wordsworth perished on the
5th of February 1805; and if the poem was written in 1805, it must have
been in the month of January of that year. The note to the poem is
explicit--"Not long after" he "perished by shipwreck," etc. Thus the
poem _may_ have been written in the beginning of 1805; but it is not at
all certain that part of it at least does not belong to an earlier year.
John Wordsworth lived with his brother and sister at the Town-end
Cottage, Grasmere, during part of the winter, and during the whole of
the spring, summer, and autumn of 1800, William and John going together
on foot into Yorkshire from the 14th of May to the 7th of June. John
left Grasmere on Michaelmas day (September 29th) 1800, and never
returned to it again. The following is Miss Wordsworth's record of that
day in her Journal of 1800:

  "On Monday, 29th, John left us. William and I parted with him in sight
  of Ullswater. It was a fine day, showery, but with sunshine and fine
  clouds. Poor fellow, my heart was right sad, I could not help thinking
  we should see him again, because he was only going to Penrith."

In the spring of 1801, John Wordsworth sailed for China in the
'Abergavenny'.  He returned from this voyage in safety, and the brothers
met once again in London. He went to sea again in 1803, and returned to
London in 1804, but could not visit Grasmere; and in the month of
February 1805--shortly after he was appointed to the command of the
'Abergavenny'--the ship was lost at the Bill of Portland, and every one
on board perished. It is clear that the latter part of the poem, "When,
to the attractions of the busy world," was written between John
Wordsworth's departure from Grasmere and the loss of the 'Abergavenny',
i. e. between September 1800 and February 1805, as there are references
in it both to what his brother did at Grasmere and to his return to
sea:

  'Back to the joyless Ocean thou art gone.'

There are some things in the earlier part of the poem that appear to
negative the idea of its having been written in 1800. The opening lines
seem to hint at an experience somewhat distant. He speaks of being
"wont" to do certain things. But, on the other hand, I find an entry in
Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal, which leads me to believe that the poem
may have been begun in 1800, and that the first part, ending (as it did
then) with the line:

  'While she is travelling through the dreary sea,'

may have been finished before John Wordsworth left Grasmere;
the second part being written afterwards, while he was at sea;
and that this is the explanation of the date given in the editions
of 1815 and 1820, viz. 1802.

Passages occur in Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal to the
following effect:

  "Monday Morning, 1st September.--We walked in the wood by the lake.
  William read 'Joanna' and 'the Firgrove' to Coleridge."

A little earlier there is the record,

  "Saturday, 22nd August.--William was composing all the morning....
  William read us the poem of 'Joanna' beside the Rothay by the
  roadside."

Then, on Friday, the 25th August, there is the entry,

  "We walked over the hill by the Firgrove, I sate upon a rock and
  observed a flight of swallows gathering together high above my head.
  We walked through the wood to the stepping stones, the lake of Rydale
  very beautiful, partly still, I left William to compose an
  inscription, that about the path...."

Then, next day,

  "Saturday morning, 30th August.--William finished his inscription of
  the Pathway, then walked in the wood, and when John returned he sought
  him, and they bathed together."

To what poem Dorothy Wordsworth referred under the name of the
"Inscription of the Pathway" has puzzled me much. There is no poem
amongst his "Inscriptions" (written in or before August 1800) that
corresponds to it in the least. But, if my conjecture is right that this
"Poem on the Naming of Places," beginning:

  'When, to the attractions of the busy world,'

was composed at two different times, it is quite possible that "the
Firgrove" which was read--along with 'Joanna'--to Coleridge on September
1st, 1800, was the first part of this very poem.

If this supposition is correct, some light is cast both on the
"Inscription of the Pathway." and on the date assigned by Wordsworth
himself to the poem. There is a certain fitness, however, in this poem
being placed--as it now is--in sequence to the 'Elegiac Verses' in
memory of John Wordsworth, beginning, "The Sheep-boy whistled loud," and
near the fourth poem 'To the Daisy', beginning, "Sweet Flower! belike
one day to have."

The "Fir-grove" still exists. It is between Wishing Gate and White Moss
Common, and almost exactly opposite the former. Standing at the gate and
looking eastwards, the grove is to the left, not forty yards distant.
Some of the firs (Scotch ones) still survive, and several beech trees,
not "a single beech-tree," as in the poem. From this, one might infer
that the present colony had sprung up since the beginning of the
century, and that the special tree, in which was the thrush's nest, had
perished; but Dr. Cradock wrote to me that "Wordsworth pointed out the
tree to Miss Cookson a few days before Dora Wordsworth's death. The tree
is near the upper wall and tells its own tale." The Fir-grove--"John's
Grove"--can easily be entered by a gate about a hundred yards beyond
the Wishing-gate, as one goes toward Rydal. The view from it, the
"visionary scene,"

                           'the spectacle
  Of clouded splendour, ... this dream-like sight
  Of solemn loveliness,'

is now much interfered with by the new larch plantations immediately
below the firs. It must have been very different in Wordsworth's time,
and is constantly referred to in his sister's Journal as a favourite
retreat, resorted to

                           'when cloudless suns
  Shone hot, or wind blew troublesome and strong.'

In the absence of contrary testimony, it might be supposed that "the
track" which the brother had "worn,"

  'By pacing here, unwearied and alone,'

faced Silver-How and the Grasmere Island, and that the single beech tree
was nearer the lower than the upper wall. But Miss Cookson's testimony
is explicit. Only a few fir trees survive at this part of the grove,
which is now open and desolate, not as it was in those earlier days,
when

                                  'the trees
  Had been so thickly planted, and had thriven
  With such perplexed and intricate array,
  That vainly did I seek, beneath their stems
  A length of open space ...'

Dr. Cradock remarks,

  "As to there being more than one beech, Wordsworth would not have
  hesitated to sacrifice servile exactness to poetical effect." He had a
  fancy for "one"--

    'Fair as a star when only one
    Is shining in the sky;'

  "'One' abode, no more;" Grasmere's "one green island;" "one green
  field."

Since the above note was printed, new light has been cast on the
"Inscription of the Pathway," for which see volume viii. of this
edition.--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE COTTAGER TO HER INFANT

BY MY SISTER


Composed 1805.--Published 1815


[Suggested to her, while beside my sleeping children.--I. F.]

One of the "Poems founded on the Affections."--Ed.




  The days are cold, the nights are long,
  The north-wind sings a doleful song;
  Then hush again upon my breast;
  All merry things are now at rest,
    Save thee, my pretty Love!                          5

  The kitten sleeps upon the hearth,
  The crickets long have ceased their mirth;
  There's nothing stirring in the house
  Save one _wee_, hungry, nibbling mouse,
    Then why so busy thou?                             10

  Nay! start not at that sparkling light;
  'Tis but the moon that shines so bright
  On the window pane bedropped with rain:
  Then, little Darling! sleep again,
    And wake when it is day.                           15



This poem underwent no change in successive editions. The title in all
the earlier ones (1815 to 1843) was 'The Cottager to her Infant. By a
Female Friend'; and in the preface to the edition of 1815, Wordsworth
wrote,

  "Three short pieces (now first published) are the work of a Female
  Friend; ... if any one regard them with dislike, or be disposed to
  condemn them, let the censure fall upon him, who, trusting in his own
  sense of their merit, and their fitness for the place which they
  occupy, _extorted_ them from the Authoress."

In the edition of 1845, he disclosed the authorship; and gave the more
natural title, 'By my Sister'. Other two poems by her were introduced
into the edition of 1815, and subsequent ones, viz. the 'Address to a
Child', and 'The Mother's Return'. In an appendix to a MS. copy of the
'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland', by Dorothy Wordsworth,
transcribed by Mrs. Clarkson, I find the poem 'The Cottager to her
Infant' with two additional stanzas, which are there attributed to
Wordsworth. The appendix runs thus:

  "To my Niece Dorothy, a sleepless Baby

    THE COTTAGER TO HER INFANT

  (The third and fourth stanzas which follow by W. W.)

    'Ah! if I were a lady gay
    I should not grieve with thee to play;
    Right gladly would I lie awake
    Thy lively spirits to partake,
      And ask no better cheer.

    But, Babe! there's none to work for me.
    And I must rise to industry;
    Soon as the cock begins to crow
    Thy mother to the fold must go
      To tend the sheep and kine.'"

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE WAGGONER [A]


Composed 1805.--Published 1819


[Written at Town-end, Grasmere. The characters and story from fact.--I.
F.]


                  "In Cairo's crowded streets
  The impatient Merchant, wondering, waits in vain,
  And Mecca saddens at the long delay."

  THOMSON. [B]



TO CHARLES LAMB, ESQ.

MY DEAR FRIEND,

When I sent you, a few weeks ago, the Tale of 'Peter Bell', you asked
"why THE WAGGONER was not added?"--To say the truth,--from the higher
tone of imagination, and the deeper touches of passion aimed at in the
former, I apprehended, this little Piece could not accompany it without
disadvantage. In the year 1806, if I am not mistaken, THE WAGGONER was
read to you in manuscript; and, as you have remembered it for so long a
time, I am the more encouraged to hope, that, since the localities on
which it partly depends did not prevent its being interesting to you, it
may prove acceptable to others. Being therefore in some measure the
cause of its present appearance, you must allow me the gratification of
inscribing it to you; in acknowledgment of the pleasure I have derived
from your Writings, and of the high esteem with which
I am
Very truly yours,
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.

RYDAL MOUNT, _May 20th_, 1819.




CANTO FIRST


  'Tis spent--this burning day of June!
  Soft darkness o'er its latest gleams is stealing;
  The buzzing dor-hawk, round and round, is wheeling,--
  That solitary bird
  Is all that can be heard [1]                                       5
  In silence deeper far than that of deepest noon!

    Confiding Glow-worms, 'tis a night
  Propitious to your earth-born light!
  But, where the scattered stars are seen
  In hazy straits the clouds between,                               10
  Each, in his station twinkling not,
  Seems changed into a pallid spot. [2]
  The mountains against heaven's grave weight
  Rise up, and grow to wondrous height. [3]
  The air, as in a lion's den,                                      15
  Is close and hot;--and now and then
  Comes a tired [4] and sultry breeze
  With a haunting and a panting,
  Like the stifling of disease;
  But the dews [5] allay the heat,                                  20
  And the silence makes it sweet.

    Hush, there is some one on the stir!
  'Tis Benjamin the Waggoner;
  Who long hath trod this toilsome way,
  Companion of the night and [6] day.                               25
  That far-off tinkling's drowsy cheer,
  Mix'd with a faint yet grating sound
  In a moment lost and found,
  The Wain announces--by whose side
  Along the banks of Rydal Mere                                     30
  He paces on, a trusty Guide,--
  Listen! you can scarcely hear!
  Hither he his course is bending;--
  Now he leaves the lower ground,
  And up the craggy hill ascending                                  35
  Many a stop and stay he makes,
  Many a breathing-fit he takes;--[7]
  Steep the way and wearisome,
  Yet all the while his whip is dumb!

    The Horses have worked with right good-will,                    40
  And so [8] have gained the top of the hill;
  He was patient, they were strong,
  And now they smoothly glide along,
  Recovering [9] breath, and pleased to win
  The praises of mild Benjamin.                                     45
  Heaven shield him from mishap and snare!
  But why so early with this prayer?
  Is it for threatenings in the sky?
  Or for some other danger nigh?
  No; none is near him yet, though he                               50
  Be one of much infirmity; [10]
  For at the bottom of the brow,
  Where once the DOVE and OLIVE-BOUGH
  Offered a greeting of good ale
  To all who entered Grasmere Vale;                                 55
  And called on him who must depart
  To leave it with a jovial heart;
  There, where the DOVE and OLIVE-BOUGH
  Once hung, a Poet harbours now,
  A simple water-drinking Bard;                                     60
  Why need our Hero then (though frail
  His best resolves) be on his guard?
  He marches by, secure and bold;
  Yet while he thinks on times of old,
  It seems that all looks wondrous cold;                            65
  He shrugs his shoulders, shakes his head,
  And, for the honest folk within,
  It is a doubt with Benjamin
  Whether they be alive or dead!

    _Here_ is no danger,--none at all!                              70
  Beyond his wish he walks secure; [11]
  But pass a mile--and _then_ for trial,--
  Then for the pride of self-denial;
  If he resist that tempting door,
  Which with such friendly voice will call;                         75
  If he resist those casement panes,
  And that bright gleam which thence will fall
  Upon his Leaders' bells and manes,
  Inviting him with cheerful lure:
  For still, though all be dark elsewhere,                          80
  Some shining notice will be 'there'
  Of open house and ready fare.

    The place to Benjamin right well [12]
  Is known, and by as strong a spell
  As used to be that sign of love                                   85
  And hope--the OLIVE-BOUGH and DOVE;
  He knows it to his cost, good Man!
  Who does not know the famous SWAN?
  Object uncouth! and yet our boast, [13]
  For it was painted by the Host;                                   90
  His own conceit the figure planned,
  'Twas coloured all by his own hand;
  And that frail Child of thirsty clay,
  Of whom I sing [14] this rustic lay,
  Could tell with self-dissatisfaction                              95
  Quaint stories of the bird's attraction! [C]

    Well! that is past--and in despite
  Of open door and shining light.
  And now the conqueror essays
  The long ascent of Dunmail-raise;                                100
  And with his team is gentle here
  As when he clomb from Rydal Mere;
  His whip they do not dread--his voice
  They only hear it to rejoice.
  To stand or go is at _their_ pleasure;                           105
  Their efforts and their time they measure
  By generous pride within the breast;
  And, while they strain, and while they rest,
  He thus pursues his thoughts at leisure.

    Now am I fairly safe to-night--110
  And with proud cause my heart is light: [15]
  I trespassed lately worse than ever--
  But Heaven has blest [16] a good endeavour;
  And, to my soul's content, [17] I find
  The evil One is left behind.                                     115
  Yes, let my master fume and fret,
  Here am I--with my horses yet!
  My jolly team, he finds that ye
  Will work for nobody but me!
  Full proof of this the Country gained;                           120
  It knows how ye were vexed and strained,
  And forced unworthy stripes to bear,
  When trusted to another's care. [18]
  Here was it--on this rugged slope,
  Which now ye climb with heart and hope,                          125
  I saw you, between rage and fear,
  Plunge, and fling back a spiteful ear,
  And ever more and more confused,
  As ye were more and more abused: [19]
  As chance would have it, passing by                              130
  I saw you in that [20] jeopardy:
  A word from me was like a charm; [D]
  Ye pulled together with one mind; [21]
  And your huge burthen, safe from harm,
  Moved like a vessel in the wind!                                 135
  --Yes, without me, up hills so high
  'Tis vain to strive for mastery.
  Then grieve not, jolly team! though tough
  The road we travel, steep, and rough; [22]
  Though Rydal-heights and Dunmail-raise,                          140
  And all their fellow banks and braes,
  Full often make you stretch and strain,
  And halt for breath and halt again,
  Yet to their sturdiness 'tis owing
  That side by side we still are going!                            145

    While Benjamin in earnest mood
  His meditations thus pursued,
  A storm, which had been smothered long,
  Was growing inwardly more strong;
  And, in its struggles to get free,                               150
  Was busily employed as he.
  The thunder had begun to growl--
  He heard not, too intent of soul;
  The air was now without a breath--
  He marked not that 'twas still as death.                         155
  But soon large rain-drops on his head [23]
  Fell with the weight of drops of lead;--
  He starts--and takes, at the admonition,
  A sage survey of his condition. [24]
  The road is black before his eyes,                               160
  Glimmering faintly where it lies;
  Black is the sky--and every hill,
  Up to the sky, is blacker still--
  Sky, hill, and dale, one dismal room, [25]
  Hung round and overhung with gloom;                              165
  Save that above a single height
  Is to be seen a lurid light,
  Above Helm-crag [E]--a streak half dead,
  A burning of portentous red;
  And near that lurid light, full well                             170
  The ASTROLOGER, sage Sidrophel,
  Where at his desk and book he sits,
  Puzzling aloft [26] his curious wits;
  He whose domain is held in common
  With no one but the ANCIENT WOMAN,                               175
  Cowering beside her rifted cell,
  As if intent on magic spell;-
  Dread pair, that, spite of wind and weather,
  Still sit upon Helm-crag together!

    The ASTROLOGER was not unseen                                  180
  By solitary Benjamin;
  But total darkness came anon,
  And he and every thing was gone:
  And suddenly a ruffling breeze,
  (That would have rocked the sounding trees                       185
  Had aught of sylvan growth been there)
  Swept through the Hollow long and bare: [27]
  The rain rushed down--the road was battered,
  As with the force of billows shattered;
  The horses are dismayed, nor know                                190
  Whether they should stand or go;
  And Benjamin is groping near them,
  Sees nothing, and can scarcely hear them.
  He is astounded,--wonder not,--
  With such a charge in such a spot;                               195
  Astounded in the mountain gap
  With thunder-peals, clap after clap,
  Close-treading on the silent flashes--
  And somewhere, as he thinks, by crashes [28]
  Among the rocks; with weight of rain,                            200
  And sullen [29] motions long and slow,
  That to a dreary distance go--
  Till, breaking in upon the dying strain,
  A rending o'er his head begins the fray again.

    Meanwhile, uncertain what to do,                               205
  And oftentimes compelled to halt,
  The horses cautiously pursue
  Their way, without mishap or fault;
  And now have reached that pile of stones,
  Heaped over brave King Dunmail's bones;                          210
  He who had once supreme command,
  Last king of rocky Cumberland;
  His bones, and those of all his Power,
  Slain here in a disastrous hour!

    When, passing through this narrow strait,                      215
  Stony, and dark, and desolate,
  Benjamin can faintly hear
  A voice that comes from some one near,
  A female voice:--"Whoe'er you be,
  Stop," it exclaimed, "and pity me!"                              220
  And, less in pity than in wonder,
  Amid the darkness and the thunder,
  The Waggoner, with prompt command,
  Summons his horses to a stand.

    While, with increasing agitation,                              225
  The Woman urged her supplication,
  In rueful words, with sobs between--
  The voice of tears that fell unseen; [30]
  There came a flash--a startling glare,
  And all Seat-Sandal was laid bare!                               230
  'Tis not a time for nice suggestion,
  And Benjamin, without a question,
  Taking her for some way-worn rover, [31]
  Said, "Mount, and get you under cover!"
  Another voice, in tone as hoarse                                 235
  As a swoln brook with rugged course,
  Cried out, "Good brother, why so fast?
  I've had a glimpse of you--'avast!'
  Or, since it suits you to be civil,
  Take her at once--for good and evil!"                            240

  "It is my Husband," softly said
  The Woman, as if half afraid:
  By this time she was snug within,
  Through help of honest Benjamin;
  She and her Babe, which to her breast                            245
  With thankfulness the Mother pressed;
  And now the same strong voice more near
  Said cordially, "My Friend, what cheer?
  Rough doings these! as God's my judge,
  The sky owes somebody a grudge!                                  250
  We've had in half an hour or less
  A twelvemonth's terror [32] and distress!"

  Then Benjamin entreats the Man
  Would mount, too, quickly as he can:
  The Sailor--Sailor now no more,                                  255
  But such he had been heretofore--
  To courteous Benjamin replied,
  "Go you your way, and mind not me;
  For I must have, whate'er betide,
  My Ass and fifty things beside,--260
  Go, and I'll follow speedily!"

  The Waggon moves--and with its load
  Descends along the sloping road;
  And the rough Sailor instantly
  Turns to a little tent hard by: [33]                             265
  For when, at closing-in of day,
  The family had come that way,
  Green pasture and the soft warm air
  Tempted [34] them to settle there.--
  Green is the grass for beast to graze,                           270
  Around the stones of Dunmail-raise!

  The Sailor gathers up his bed,
  Takes down the canvass overhead;
  And, after farewell to the place,
  A parting word--though not of grace,                             275
  Pursues, with Ass and all his store,
  The way the Waggon went before.



CANTO SECOND


  If Wytheburn's modest House of prayer,
  As lowly as the lowliest dwelling,
  Had, with its belfry's humble stock,                             280
  A little pair that hang in air,
  Been mistress also of a clock,
  (And one, too, not in crazy plight)
  Twelve strokes that clock would have been telling
  Under the brow of old Helvellyn--285
  Its bead-roll of midnight,
  Then, when the Hero of my tale
  Was passing by, and, down the vale
  (The vale now silent, hushed I ween
  As if a storm had never been)                                    290
  Proceeding with a mind at ease;
  While the old Familiar of the seas [35]
  Intent to use his utmost haste,
  Gained ground upon the Waggon fast,
  And gives another lusty cheer;                                   295
  For spite of rumbling of the wheels,
  A welcome greeting he can hear;--
  It is a fiddle in its glee
  Dinning from the CHERRY TREE!

  Thence the sound--the light is there--300
  As Benjamin is now aware,
  Who, to his inward thoughts confined,
  Had almost reached the festive door,
  When, startled by the Sailor's roar, [36]
  He hears a sound and sees the light,                             305
  And in a moment calls to mind
  That 'tis the village MERRY-NIGHT! [F]

  Although before in no dejection,
  At this insidious recollection
  His heart with sudden joy is filled,--310
  His ears are by the music thrilled,
  His eyes take pleasure in the road
  Glittering before him bright and broad;
  And Benjamin is wet and cold,
  And there are reasons manifold                                   315
  That make the good, tow'rds which he's yearning,
  Look fairly like a lawful earning.

    Nor has thought time to come and go,
  To vibrate between yes and no;
  For, cries the Sailor, "Glorious chance                          320
  That blew us hither!--let him dance,
  Who can or will!--my honest soul,
  Our treat shall be a friendly bowl!" [37]
  He draws him to the door--"Come in,
  Come, come," cries he to Benjamin!                               325
  And Benjamin--ah, woe is me!
  Gave the word--the horses heard
  And halted, though reluctantly.

    "Blithe souls and lightsome hearts have we,
  Feasting at the CHERRY TREE!"                                    330
  This was the outside proclamation,
  This was the inside salutation;
  What bustling--jostling--high and low!
  A universal overflow!
  What tankards foaming from the tap!                              335
  What store of cakes in every lap!
  What thumping--stumping--overhead!
  The thunder had not been more busy:
  With such a stir you would have said,
  This little place may well be dizzy!                             340
  'Tis who can dance with greatest vigour--
  'Tis what can be most prompt and eager;
  As if it heard the fiddle's call,
  The pewter clatters on the wall;
  The very bacon shows its feeling,                                345
  Swinging from the smoky ceiling!

    A steaming bowl, a blazing fire,
  What greater good can heart desire?
  'Twere worth a wise man's while to try
  The utmost anger of the sky:                                     350
  To _seek_ for thoughts of a gloomy cast,
  If such the bright amends at last. [38]
  Now should you say [39] I judge amiss,
  The CHERRY TREE shows proof of this;
  For soon of all [40] the happy there,                            355
  Our Travellers are the happiest pair;
  All care with Benjamin is gone--
  A Caesar past the Rubicon!
  He thinks not of his long, long strife;--
  The Sailor, Man by nature gay,                                   360
  Hath no resolves to throw away; [41]
  And he hath now forgot his Wife,
  Hath quite forgotten her--or may be
  Thinks her the luckiest soul on earth,
  Within that warm and peaceful berth, [42]                        365
             Under cover,
             Terror over,
  Sleeping by her sleeping Baby.

    With bowl that sped from hand to hand,
  The gladdest of the gladsome band,                               370
  Amid their own delight and fun, [43]
  They hear--when every dance is done,
  When every whirling bout is o'er--[44]
  The fiddle's _squeak_ [G]--that call to bliss,
  Ever followed by a kiss;                                         375
  They envy not the happy lot,
  But enjoy their own the more!

    While thus our jocund Travellers fare,
  Up springs the Sailor from his chair--
  Limps (for I might have told before                              380
  That he was lame) across the floor--
  Is gone--returns--and with a prize;
  With what?--a Ship of lusty size;
  A gallant stately Man-of-war,
  Fixed on a smoothly-sliding car.                                 385
  Surprise to all, but most surprise
  To Benjamin, who rubs his eyes,
  Not knowing that he had befriended
  A Man so gloriously attended!

    "This," cries the Sailor, "a Third-rate is--390
  Stand back, and you shall see her gratis!
  This was the Flag-ship at the Nile,
  The Vanguard--you may smirk and smile,
  But, pretty Maid, if you look near,
  You'll find you've much in little here!                          395
  A nobler ship did never swim,
  And you shall see her in full trim:
  I'll set, my friends, to do you honour,
  Set every inch of sail upon her."
  So said, so done; and masts, sails, yards,                       400
  He names them all; and interlards
  His speech with uncouth terms of art,
  Accomplished in the showman's part;
  And then, as from a sudden check,
  Cries out--"'Tis there, the quarter-deck                         405
  On which brave Admiral Nelson stood--
  A sight that would have roused your blood!
  One eye he had, which, bright as ten,
  Burned like a fire among his men;
  Let this be land, and that be sea,                               410
  Here lay the French--and _thus_ came we!" [H]

    Hushed was by this the fiddle's sound,
  The dancers all were gathered round,
  And, such the stillness of the house,
  You might have heard a nibbling mouse;                           415
  While, borrowing helps where'er he may,
  The Sailor through the story runs
  Of ships to ships and guns to guns;
  And does his utmost to display
  The dismal conflict, and the might                               420
  And terror of that marvellous [45] night!
  "A bowl, a bowl of double measure,"
  Cries Benjamin, "a draught of length,
  To Nelson, England's pride and treasure,
  Her bulwark and her tower of strength!"                          425
  When Benjamin had seized the bowl,
  The mastiff, from beneath the waggon,
  Where he lay, watchful as a dragon,
  Rattled his chain;--'twas all in vain,
  For Benjamin, triumphant soul!                                   430
  He heard the monitory growl;
  Heard--and in opposition quaffed
  A deep, determined, desperate draught!
  Nor did the battered Tar forget,
  Or flinch from what he deemed his debt:                          435
  Then, like a hero crowned with laurel,
  Back to her place the ship he led;
  Wheeled her back in full apparel;
  And so, flag flying at mast head,
  Re-yoked her to the Ass:--anon,                                  440
  Cries Benjamin, "We must be gone."
  Thus, after two hours' hearty stay,
  Again behold them on their way!


CANTO THIRD

  Right gladly had the horses stirred,
  When they the wished-for greeting heard,                         445
  The whip's loud notice from the door,
  That they were free to move once more.
  You think, those [46] doings must have bred
  In them disheartening doubts and dread;
  No, not a horse of all the eight,                                450
  Although it be a moonless night,
  Fears either for himself or freight;
  For this they know (and let it hide,
  In part, the offences of their guide)
  That Benjamin, with clouded brains,                              455
  Is worth the best with all their pains;
  And, if they had a prayer to make,
  The prayer would be that they may take
  With him whatever comes in course,
  The better fortune or the worse;                                 460
  That no one else may have business near them,
  And, drunk or sober, he may steer them.

    So, forth in dauntless mood they fare,
  And with them goes the guardian pair.

    Now, heroes, for the true commotion,                           465
  The triumph of your late devotion!
  Can aught on earth impede delight,
  Still mounting to a higher height;
  And higher still--a greedy flight!
  Can any low-born care pursue her,                                470
  Can any mortal clog come to her? [J]
  No notion have they--not a thought,
  That is from joyless regions brought!
  And, while they coast the silent lake,
  Their inspiration I partake;                                     475
  Share their empyreal spirits--yea,
  With their enraptured vision, see--
  O fancy--what a jubilee!
  What shifting pictures--clad in gleams
  Of colour bright as feverish dreams!                             480
  Earth, spangled sky, and lake serene,
  Involved and restless all--a scene
  Pregnant with mutual exaltation,
  Rich change, and multiplied creation!
  This sight to me the Muse imparts;--485
  And then, what kindness in their hearts!
  What tears of rapture, what vow-making,
  Profound entreaties, and hand-shaking!
  What solemn, vacant, interlacing,
  As if they'd fall asleep embracing!                              490
  Then, in the turbulence of glee,
  And in the excess of amity,
  Says Benjamin, "That Ass of thine,
  He spoils thy sport, and hinders mine:
  If he were tethered to the waggon,                               495
  He'd drag as well what he is dragging;
  And we, as brother should with brother,
  Might trudge it alongside each other!"

    Forthwith, obedient to command,
  The horses made a quiet stand;                                   500
  And to the waggon's skirts was tied
  The Creature, by the Mastiff's side,
  The Mastiff wondering, and perplext
  With dread of what will happen next;
  And thinking it but sorry cheer,                                 505
  To have such company so near! [47]

    This new arrangement made, the Wain
  Through the still night proceeds again;
  No Moon hath risen her light to lend;
  But indistinctly may be kenned                                   510
  The VANGUARD, following close behind,
  Sails spread, as if to catch the wind!

    "Thy wife and child are snug and warm,
  Thy ship will travel without harm;
  I like," said Benjamin, "her shape and stature:                  515
  And this of mine--this bulky creature
  Of which I have the steering--this,
  Seen fairly, is not much amiss!
  We want your streamers, friend, you know;
  But, altogether [48] as we go,                                   520
  We make a kind of handsome show!
  Among these hills, from first to last,
  We've weathered many a furious blast;
  Hard passage forcing on, with head
  Against the storm, and canvass spread.                           525
  I hate a boaster; but to thee
  Will say't, who know'st both land and sea,
  The unluckiest hulk that stems [49] the brine
  Is hardly worse beset than mine,
  When cross-winds on her quarter beat;                            530
  And, fairly lifted from my feet,
  I stagger onward--heaven knows how;
  But not so pleasantly as now:
  Poor pilot I, by snows confounded,
  And many a foundrous pit surrounded!                             535
  Yet here we are, by night and day
  Grinding through rough and smooth our way;
  Through foul and fair our task fulfilling;
  And long shall be so yet--God willing!"

    "Ay," said the Tar, "through fair and foul--540
  But save us from yon screeching owl!"
  That instant was begun a fray
  Which called their thoughts another way:
  The mastiff, ill-conditioned carl!
  What must he do but growl and snarl,                             545
  Still more and more dissatisfied
  With the meek comrade at his side!
  Till, not incensed though put to proof,
  The Ass, uplifting a hind hoof,
  Salutes the Mastiff on the head;                                 550
  And so were better manners bred,
  And all was calmed and quieted.

    "Yon screech-owl," says the Sailor, turning
  Back to his former cause of mourning,
  "Yon owl!--pray God that all be well!                            555
  'Tis worse than any funeral bell;
  As sure as I've the gift of sight,
  We shall be meeting ghosts to-night!"
--Said Benjamin, "This whip shall lay
  A thousand, if they cross our way.                               560
  I know that Wanton's noisy station,
  I know him and his occupation;
  The jolly bird hath learned his cheer
  Upon [50] the banks of Windermere;
  Where a tribe of them make merry,                                565
  Mocking the Man that keeps the ferry;
  Hallooing from an open throat,
  Like travellers shouting for a boat.
--The tricks he learned at Windermere
  This vagrant owl is playing here--570
  That is the worst of his employment:
  He's at the top [51] of his enjoyment!"

    This explanation stilled the alarm,
  Cured the foreboder like a charm;
  This, and the manner, and the voice,                             575
  Summoned the Sailor to rejoice;
  His heart is up--he fears no evil
  From life or death, from man or devil;
  He wheels [52]--and, making many stops,
  Brandished his crutch against the mountain tops;                 580
  And, while he talked of blows and scars,
  Benjamin, among the stars,
  Beheld a dancing--and a glancing;
  Such retreating and advancing
  As, I ween, was never seen                                       585
  In bloodiest battle since the days of Mars!



CANTO FOURTH


  Thus they, with freaks of proud delight,
  Beguile the remnant of the night;
  And many a snatch of jovial song
  Regales them as they wind along;                                 590
  While to the music, from on high,
  The echoes make a glad reply.--
  But the sage Muse the revel heeds
  No farther than her story needs;
  Nor will she servilely attend                                    595
  The loitering journey to its end.
--Blithe spirits of her own impel
  The Muse, who scents the morning air,
  To take of this transported pair
  A brief and unreproved farewell;                                 600
  To quit the slow-paced waggon's side,
  And wander down yon hawthorn dell,
  With murmuring Greta for her guide.
--There doth she ken the awful form
  Of Raven-crag--black as a storm--605
  Glimmering through the twilight pale;
  And Ghimmer-crag, [K] his tall twin brother,
  Each peering forth to meet the other:--
  And, while she roves [53] through St. John's Vale,
  Along the smooth unpathwayed plain,                              610
  By sheep-track or through cottage lane,
  Where no disturbance comes to intrude
  Upon the pensive solitude,
  Her unsuspecting eye, perchance,
  With the rude shepherd's favoured glance,                        615
  Beholds the faeries in array,
  Whose party-coloured garments gay
  The silent company betray:
  Red, green, and blue; a moment's sight!
  For Skiddaw-top with rosy light                                  620
  Is touched--and all the band take flight.
--Fly also, Muse! and from the dell
  Mount to the ridge of Nathdale Fell;
  Thence, look thou forth o'er wood and lawn
  Hoar with the frost-like dews of dawn;                           625
  Across yon meadowy bottom look,
  Where close fogs hide their parent brook;
  And see, beyond that hamlet small,
  The ruined towers of Threlkeld-hall,
  Lurking in a double shade,                                       630
  By trees and lingering twilight made!
  There, at Blencathara's rugged feet,
  Sir Lancelot gave a safe retreat
  To noble Clifford; from annoy
  Concealed the persecuted boy,                                    635
  Well pleased in rustic garb to feed
  His flock, and pipe on shepherd's reed
  Among this multitude of hills,
  Crags, woodlands, waterfalls, and rills;
  Which soon the morning shall enfold,                             640
  From east to west, in ample vest
  Of massy gloom and radiance bold.

    The mists, that o'er the streamlet's bed
  Hung low, begin to rise and spread;
  Even while I speak, their skirts of grey                         645
  Are smitten by a silver ray;
  And lo!--up Castrigg's naked steep
  (Where, smoothly urged, the vapours sweep
  Along--and scatter and divide,
  Like fleecy clouds self-multiplied)                              650
  The stately waggon is ascending,
  With faithful Benjamin attending,
  Apparent now beside his team--
  Now lost amid a glittering steam: [54]
  And with him goes his Sailor-friend,                             655
  By this time near their journey's end;
  And, after their high-minded riot,
  Sickening into thoughtful quiet;
  As if the morning's pleasant hour,
  Had for their joys a killing power.                              660
  And, sooth, for Benjamin a vein
  Is opened of still deeper pain,
  As if his heart by notes were stung
  From out the lowly hedge-rows flung;
  As if the warbler lost in light [L]                              665
  Reproved his soarings of the night,
  In strains of rapture pure and holy
  Upbraided his distempered folly. [55]

    Drooping is he, his step is dull; [56]
  But the horses stretch and pull;                                 670
  With increasing vigour climb,
  Eager to repair lost time;
  Whether, by their own desert,
  Knowing what cause there is [57] for shame,
  They are labouring to avert                                      675
  As much as may be of the blame, [58]
  Which, they foresee, must soon alight
  Upon _his_ head, whom, in despite
  Of all his failings, they love best; [59]
  Whether for him they are distrest,                               680
  Or, by length of fasting roused,
  Are impatient to be housed:
  Up against the hill they strain
  Tugging at the iron chain,
  Tugging all with might and main,                                 685
  Last and foremost, every horse
  To the utmost of his force!
  And the smoke and respiration,
  Rising like an exhalation,
  Blend [60] with the mist--a moving shroud                        690
  To form, an undissolving cloud;
  Which, with slant ray, the merry sun
  Takes delight to play upon.
  Never golden-haired Apollo,
  Pleased some favourite chief to follow                           695
  Through accidents of peace or war,
  In a perilous moment threw
  Around the object of his care
  Veil of such celestial hue; [61]
  Interposed so bright a screen--700
  Him and his enemies between!

    Alas! what boots it?--who can hide,
  When the malicious Fates are bent
  On working out an ill intent?
  Can destiny be turned aside?                                     705
  No--sad progress of my story!
  Benjamin, this outward glory
  Cannot shield [62] thee from thy Master,
  Who from Keswick has pricked forth,
  Sour and surly as the north;                                     710
  And, in fear of some disaster,
  Comes to give what help he may,
  And [63] to hear what thou canst say;
  If, as needs he must forebode, [64]
  Thou hast been loitering [65] on the road!                       715
  His fears, his doubts, [66] may now take flight--
  The wished-for object is in sight;
  Yet, trust the Muse, it rather hath
  Stirred him up to livelier wrath;
  Which he stifles, moody man!                                     720
  With all the patience that he can;
  To the end that, at your meeting,
  He may give thee decent greeting.

    There he is--resolved to stop,
  Till the waggon gains the top;                                   725
  But stop he cannot--must advance:
  Him Benjamin, with lucky glance,
  Espies--and instantly is ready,
  Self-collected, poised, and steady:
  And, to be the better seen,                                      730
  Issues from his radiant shroud,
  From his close-attending cloud,
  With careless air and open mien.
  Erect his port, and firm his going;
  So struts yon cock that now is crowing;                          735
  And the morning light in grace
  Strikes upon his lifted face,
  Hurrying the pallid hue away
  That might his trespasses betray.
  But what can all avail to clear him,                             740
  Or what need of explanation,
  Parley or interrogation?
  For the Master sees, alas!
  That unhappy Figure near him,
  Limping o'er the dewy grass,                                     745
  Where the road it fringes, sweet,
  Soft and cool to way-worn feet;
  And, O indignity! an Ass,
  By his noble Mastiffs side,
  Tethered to the waggon's tail:                                   750
  And the ship, in all her pride,
  Following after in full sail!
  Not to speak of babe and mother;
  Who, contented with each other,
  And snug as birds in leafy arbour,                               755
  Find, within, a blessed harbour!

    With eager eyes the Master pries;
  Looks in and out, and through and through;
  Says nothing--till at last he spies
  A wound upon the Mastiff's head,                                 760
  A wound, where plainly might be read
  What feats an Ass's hoof can do!
  But drop the rest:--this aggravation,
  This complicated provocation,
  A hoard of grievances unsealed;                                  765
  All past forgiveness it repealed;
  And thus, and through distempered blood
  On both sides, Benjamin the good,
  The patient, and the tender-hearted,
  Was from his team and waggon parted;                             770
  When duty of that day was o'er,
  Laid down his whip--and served no more.--
  Nor could the waggon long survive,
  Which Benjamin had ceased to drive:
  It lingered on;--guide after guide                               775
  Ambitiously the office tried;
  But each unmanageable hill
  Called for _his_ patience and _his_ skill;--
  And sure it is, that through this night,
  And what the morning brought to light,                           780
  Two losses had we to sustain,
  We lost both WAGGONER and WAIN!

         *       *       *       *       *

  Accept, O Friend, for praise or blame,
  The gift of this adventurous song;
  A record which I dared to frame,                                 785
  Though timid scruples checked me long;
  They checked me--and I left the theme
  Untouched;--in spite of many a gleam
  Of fancy which thereon was shed,
  Like pleasant sunbeams shifting still                            790
  Upon the side of a distant hill:
  But Nature might not be gainsaid;
  For what I have and what I miss
  I sing of these;--it makes my bliss!
  Nor is it I who play the part,                                   795
  But a shy spirit in my heart,
  That comes and goes--will sometimes leap
  From hiding-places ten years deep;
  Or haunts me with familiar face, [67]
  Returning, like a ghost unlaid,                                  800
  Until the debt I owe be paid.
  Forgive me, then; for I had been
  On friendly terms with this Machine: [M]
  In him, while he was wont to trace
  Our roads, through many a long year's space,                     805
  A living almanack had we;
  We had a speaking diary,
  That in this uneventful place,
  Gave to the days a mark and name
  By which we knew them when they came.                            810
--Yes, I, and all about me here,
  Through all the changes of the year,
  Had seen him through the mountains go,
  In pomp of mist or pomp of snow,
  Majestically huge and slow:                                      815
  Or, with a milder grace [68] adorning
  The landscape of a summer's morning;
  While Grasmere smoothed her liquid plain
  The moving image to detain;
  And mighty Fairfield, with a chime                               820
  Of echoes, to his march kept time;
  When little other business stirred,
  And little other sound was heard;
  In that delicious hour of balm,
  Stillness, solitude, and calm,                                   825
  While yet the valley is arrayed,
  On this side with a sober shade;
  On that is prodigally bright--
  Crag, lawn, and wood--with rosy light.
--But most of all, thou lordly Wain!                             830
  I wish to have thee here again,
  When windows flap and chimney roars,
  And all is dismal out of doors;
  And, sitting by my fire, I see
  Eight sorry carts, no less a train!                              835
  Unworthy successors of thee,
  Come straggling through the wind and rain:
  And oft, as they pass slowly on,
  Beneath my windows, [69] one by one,
  See, perched upon the naked height                               840
  The summit of a cumbrous freight,
  A single traveller--and there
  Another; then perhaps a pair--
  The lame, the sickly, and the old;
  Men, women, heartless with the cold;                             845
  And babes in wet and starveling plight;
  Which once, [70] be weather as it might,
  Had still a nest within a nest,
  Thy shelter--and their mother's breast!
  Then most of all, then far the most,                             850
  Do I regret what we have lost;
  Am grieved for that unhappy sin
  Which robbed us of good Benjamin;--
  And of his stately Charge, which none
  Could keep alive when He was gone!                               855


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1819.

  The Night-hawk is singing his frog-like tune,
  Twirling his watchman's rattle about--1805. MS. [a]

  The dor-hawk, solitary bird,
  Round the dim crags on heavy pinions wheeling,
  Buzzes incessantly, a tiresome tune;
  That constant voice is all that can be heard     1820.

  ... on heavy pinions wheeling,
  With untired voice sings an unvaried tune;
  Those burring notes are all that can be heard    1836.

The text of 1845 returns to the first version of 1819.]


[Variant 2:

1819.

    Now that the children are abed
  The little glow-worms nothing dread,
  Such prize as their bright lamps would be.
  Sooth they come in company,
  And shine in quietness secure,
  On the mossy bank by the cottage door,
  As safe as on the loneliest moor.
  In the play, or on the hill,
  Everything is hushed and still;
  The clouds show here and there a spot
  Of a star that twinkles not,
  The air as in ...

From a MS. copy of the poem in Henry Crabb Robinson's 'Diary, etc'.
1812.

    Now that the children's busiest schemes
  Do all lie buried in blank sleep,
  Or only live in stirring dreams,
  The glow-worms fearless watch may keep;
  Rich prize as their bright lamps would be,
  They shine, a quiet company,
  On mossy bank by cottage-door,
  As safe as on the loneliest moor.
  In hazy straits the clouds between,
  And in their stations twinkling not,
  Some thinly-sprinkled stars are seen,
  Each changed into a pallid spot.              1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 3:

1836.

  The mountains rise to wond'rous height,
  And in the heavens there is a weight;        1819.

  And in the heavens there hangs a weight;     1827.

In the editions of 1819 to 1832, these two lines follow the line "Like
the stifling of disease."]


[Variant 4:

1819.

  ... faint ...      1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 5:

1819.


  But welcome dews ...      1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 6:

1819.

  ... or ...      1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 7:

1819.

  Listen! you can hardly hear!
  Now he has left the lower ground,
  And up the hill his course is bending,
  With many a stop and stay ascending;--1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 8:

1836.

  And now ...       1819.]


[Variant 9:

1836.

  Gathering ...       1819.]


[Variant 10:

1819.

  No;--him infirmities beset,
  But danger is not near him yet;       1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 11:

1836.

  is he secure;     1819.]


[Variant 12:

1836.

  full well         1819.]


[Variant 13:

1836.

  Uncouth although the object be,
  An image of perplexity;
  Yet not the less it is our boast,    1819.]


[Variant 14:

1827.

  ... I frame ...    1819.]


[Variant 15:

1836

  And never was my heart more light.      1819.]


[Variant 16:

1836.

   ... will bless ...     1819.]


[Variant 17:

1836.

   ... delight, ...       1819.]


[Variant 18:

1836.

  Good proof of this the Country gain'd,
  One day, when ye were vex'd and strain'd--
  Entrusted to another's care,
  And forc'd unworthy stripes to bear.     1819.]


[Variant 19:

1836. (Expanding four lines into six.)

  Here was it--on this rugged spot
  Which now contented with our lot
  We climb--that piteously abused
  Ye plung'd in anger and confused:     1819.]


[Variant 20:

1836.

    ... in your ...       1819.]


[Variant 21:

1836.

  The ranks were taken with one mind;      1819.]


[Variant 22:

1819.

  Our road be, narrow, steep, and rough;      1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 23:

1836.

  large drops upon his head       1819.]


[Variant 24:

1836.

  He starts-and, at the admonition,
  Takes a survey of his condition.       1819.]


[Variant 25:

1836.

A huge and melancholy room,       1819.]


[Variant 26:

1836.

  ...  on high ...   1819.]


[Variant 27: 1836. The previous four lines were added in the edition of
1820, where they read as follows:

  And suddenly a ruffling breeze
  (That would have sounded through the trees
  Had aught of sylvan growth been there)
  Was felt throughout the region bare:       1820.]


[Variant 28:

1836.

  By peals of thunder, clap on clap!
  And many a terror-striking flash;--
  And somewhere, as it seems, a crash,     1819.]


[Variant 29:

1820.

  And rattling  ...      1819,]


[Variant 30:

1836. (Compressing six lines into four.)

  The voice, to move commiseration,
  Prolong'd its earnest supplication--
  "This storm that beats so furiously--
  This dreadful place! oh pity me!"

  While this was said, with sobs between,
  And many tears, by one unseen;         1819.]


[Variant 31:

1845.

  And Benjamin, without further question,
  Taking her for some way-worn rover,          1819.

  And, kind to every way-worn rover,
  Benjamin, without a question,                1836.]


[Variant 32:

1820.

  ... trouble ...      1819.]


[Variant 33:

1845.

  And to a little tent hard by
  Turns the Sailor instantly;         1819.

  And to his tent-like domicile,
  Built in a nook with cautious skill,
  The Sailor turns, well pleased to spy
  His shaggy friend who stood hard by
  Drenched--and, more fast than with a tether,
  Bound to the nook by that fierce weather,
  Which caught the vagrants unaware:
  For, when, ere closing-in ...       1836.]


[Variant 34:

1836.

  Had tempted ...      1819.]


[Variant 35:

1836.

  Proceeding with an easy mind;
  While he, who had been left behind,      1819.]


[Variant 36:

1820.

  Who neither heard nor saw--no more
  Than if he had been deaf and blind,
  Till, startled by the Sailor's roar,      1819.]


[Variant 37:

1819.

  That blew us hither! dance, boys, dance!
  Rare luck for us! my honest soul,
  I'll treat thee to a friendly bowl!"      1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 38:

1836.

  To _seek_ for thoughts of painful cast,
  If such be the amends at last.          1819.]


[Variant 39:

1836.

   ... think ...       1819.]


[Variant 40:

1819.

  For soon among ...        1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 41:

1819.

  And happiest far is he, the One
  No longer with himself at strife,
  A Caesar past the Rubicon!
  The Sailor, Man by nature gay,
  Found not a scruple in _his_ way;         1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 42:

1836.

  Deems that she is happier, laid
  Within that warm and peaceful bed;       1819.]


[Variant 43:

1845.

       With bowl in hand,
       (It may not stand)
  Gladdest of the gladsome band,
  Amid their own delight and fun,       1819.

    With bowl that sped from hand to hand,
  Refreshed, brimful of hearty fun,
  The gladdest of the gladsome band,       1836.]


[Variant 44:

1836.

  They hear--when every fit is o'er--1819.]


[Variant 45:

1836.

  ...  wondrous ...       1819.]


[Variant 46:

1836.

  ... these ...           1819.]


[Variant 47:

1836.

  ... the Mastiff's side,
  (The Mastiff not well pleased to be
  So very near such company.)     1819.]


[Variant 48:

1832.

  ... all together, ...     1819.]


[Variant 49:

1836

  ... sails ...     1819.]


[Variant 50:

1836.

  On ...          1819.]


[Variant 51:

1836.

  He's in the height ...       1819.]


[Variant 52:

1836.

  He wheel'd--...      1819.]


[Variant 53:

1827.

  And, rambling on ...        1819.]


[Variant 54:

1819.

  Now hidden by the glittering steam:        1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 55:

1845. The previous eight lines were added in 1836, when they read thus:

  Say more: for by that power a vein
  Seems opened of brow-saddening pain:
  As if their hearts by notes were stung
  From out the lowly hedge-rows flung;
  As if the warbler lost in light
  Reproved their soarings of the night;
  In strains of rapture pure and holy
  Upbraided their distempered folly.        1836.]


[Variant 56:

1845.

  They are drooping, weak, and dull;           1819.

  Drooping are they, and weak and dull;--1836.]


[Variant 57:

1836.

  Knowing that there's cause ...      1819.

  Knowing there is cause ...          1827.]


[Variant 58:

1845.

  They are labouring to avert
  At least a portion of the blame                1819.

  They now are labouring to avert
  (Kind creatures!) something of the blame,      1836.]


[Variant 59:

1836.

  Which full surely will alight
  Upon his head, whom, in despite
  Of all his faults, they love the best;      1819.

  Upon _his_ head, ...                        1820.]


[Variant 60:

1836.

  Blends ...      1819.]


[Variant 61:

1845.

  Never, surely, old Apollo,
  He, or other God as old,
  Of whom in story we are told,
  Who had a favourite to follow
  Through a battle or elsewhere,
  Round the object of his care,
  In a time of peril, threw
  Veil of such celestial hue;          1819.

  Never Venus or Apollo,
  Pleased a favourite chief to follow
  Through accidents of peace or war,
  In a time of peril threw,
  Round the object of his care,
  Veil of such celestial hue;          1832.

  Never golden-haired Apollo,
  Nor blue-eyed Pallas, nor the Idalian Queen,
  When each was pleased some favourite chief to follow
  Through accidents of peace or war,
  In a perilous moment threw
  Around the object of celestial care
  A veil so rich to mortal view.       1836.

  Never Venus or Apollo,
  Intent some favourite chief to follow
  Through accidents of peace or war,
  Round the object of their care
  In a perilous moment threw
  A veil of such celestial hue.        C.

  Round each object of their care      C.]


[Variant 62:

1819.

  Fails to shield ...      1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 63:

1836.

  Or ...       1819.]


[Variant 64:

1819.

  If, as he cannot but forebode,      1836.

The text of 1845 returns to that of 1819.]


[Variant 65:

1836.

  Thou hast loitered ...       1819.]


[Variant 66:

1836.

  His doubts--his fears ...       1819.]


[Variant 67:

1827. (Compressing two lines into one.)

  Sometimes, as in the present case,
  Will show a more familiar face;       1819.

  Or, proud all rivalship to chase,
  Will haunt me with familiar face;     1820.]


[Variant 68:

1819.

  Or, with milder grace ...      1832.

The edition of 1845 reverts to the text of 1819.]


[Variant 69:

1836.

  ...  window ...      1819.]


[Variant 70: "Once" 'italicised' in 1820 only.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The title page of the edition of 1819 runs as follows: The
Waggoner, A Poem. To which are added, Sonnets. By William Wordsworth.

  "What's in a NAME?"
  ...
  "Brutus will start a Spirit as soon as Caesar!"

London, etc. etc., 1819,--Ed.]


[Footnote B: See 'The Seasons' (Summer), ll. 977-79.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Such is the progress of refinement, this rude piece of
self-taught art has been supplanted by a professional production.--W. W.
1819.

Mr. William Davies writes to me,

  "I spent a week there (the Swan Inn) early in the fifties, and well
  remember the sign over the door distinguishable from afar: the inn,
  little more than a cottage (the only one), with clean well-sanded
  floor, and rush-bottomed chairs: the landlady, good old soul, one day
  afraid of burdening me with some old coppers, insisted on retaining
  them till I should return from an uphill walk, when they were duly
  tendered to me. Here I learnt many particulars of Hartley Coleridge,
  dead shortly before, who had been a great favourite with the host and
  hostess. The grave of Wordsworth was at that time barely grassed
  over."--Ed.]


[Footnote D: See Wordsworth's note [Note I to this poem, below], p.
109.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: A mountain of Grasmere, the broken summit of which presents
two figures, full as distinctly shaped as that of the famous cobler,
near Arracher, in Scotland.--W. W. 1819.]


[Footnote F: A term well known in the North of England, as applied to
rural Festivals, where young persons meet in the evening for the purpose
of dancing.--W. W. 1819.]


[Footnote G: At the close of each strathspey, or jig, a particular note
from the fiddle summons the Rustic to the agreeable duty of saluting his
Partner.--W. W. 1819.]


[Footnote H: Compare in 'Tristram Shandy':

  "And this, said he, is the town of Namur, and this is the citadel: and
  there lay the French, and here lay his honour and myself."--Ed.]


[Footnote J: See Wordsworth's note [Note III to this poem, below], p.
109.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: The crag of the ewe lamb.--W. W. 1820.]


[Footnote L: Compare Tennyson's "Farewell, we lose ourselves in
light."--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Compare Wordsworth's lines, beginning, "She was a Phantom
of delight," p. i, and Hamlet, act II. sc. ii. l. 124.--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: See Wordsworth's note [Note II to the poem, below], p.
109.--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON THE TEXT

(Added in the edition of 1836)


I

Several years after the event that forms the subject of the foregoing
poem, in company with my friend, the late Mr. Coleridge, I happened to
fall in with the person to whom the name of Benjamin is given. Upon our
expressing regret that we had not, for a long time, seen upon the road
either him or his waggon, he said:--"They could not do without me; and
as to the man who was put in my place, no good could come out of him; he
was a man of no _ideas_."

The fact of my discarded hero's getting the horses out of a great
difficulty with a word, as related in the poem, was told me by an
eye-witness.


II

  'The Dor-hawk, solitary bird.'

When the Poem was first written the note of the bird was thus described:

  'The Night-hawk is singing his frog-like tune,
  Twirling his watchman's rattle about--'

but from unwillingness to startle the reader at the outset by so bold a
mode of expression, the passage was altered as it now stands.


III

After the line, 'Can any mortal clog come to her', followed in the MS.
an incident which has been kept back. Part of the suppressed verses
shall here be given as a gratification of private feeling, which the
well-disposed reader will find no difficulty in excusing. They are now
printed for the first time.

  Can any mortal clog come to her?
  It can: ...
  ...
  But Benjamin, in his vexation,
  Possesses inward consolation;
  He knows his ground, and hopes to find
  A spot with all things to his mind,
  An upright mural block of stone,
  Moist with pure water trickling down.
  A slender spring; but kind to man
  It is, a true Samaritan;
  Close to the highway, pouring out
  Its offering from a chink or spout;
  Whence all, howe'er athirst, or drooping
  With toil, may drink, and without stooping.

    Cries Benjamin, "Where is it, where?
  Voice it hath none, but must be near."
--A star, declining towards the west,
  Upon the watery surface threw
  Its image tremulously imprest,
  That just marked out the object and withdrew:
  Right welcome service! ...
  ...

                         ROCK OF NAMES!
  Light is the strain, but not unjust
  To Thee and thy memorial-trust,
  That once seemed only to express
  Love that was love in idleness;
  Tokens, as year hath followed year,
  How changed, alas, in character!
  For they were graven on thy smooth breast
  By hands of those my soul loved best;
  Meek women, men as true and brave
  As ever went to a hopeful grave:
  Their hands and mine, when side by side
  With kindred zeal and mutual pride,
  We worked until the Initials took
  Shapes that defied a scornful look.--
  Long as for us a genial feeling
  Survives, or one in need of healing,
  The power, dear Rock, around thee cast,
  Thy monumental power, shall last
  For me and mine! O thought of pain,
  That would impair it or profane!
  Take all in kindness then, as said
  With a staid heart but playful head;
  And fail not Thou, loved Rock! to keep
  Thy charge when we are laid asleep.

W. W.



There is no poem more closely identified with the Grasmere district of
the English Lakes--and with the road from Grasmere to Keswick--than 'The
Waggoner' is, and in none are the topographical allusions more minute
and faithful.

Wordsworth seemed at a loss to know in what "class" of his poems to
place 'The Waggoner;' and his frequent changes--removing it from one
group to another--shew the artificial character of these classes. Thus,
in the edition of 1820, it stood first among the "Poems of the Fancy."
In 1827 it was the last of the "Poems founded on the Affections." In
1832 it was reinstated among the "Poems of the Fancy." In 1836 it had a
place of its own, and was inserted between the "Poems of the Fancy" and
those "Founded on the Affections;" while in 1845 it was sent back to its
original place among the "Poems of the Fancy;" although in the table of
contents it was printed as an independent poem, closing the series.

The original text of 'The Waggoner' underwent little change, till the
year 1836, when it was carefully revised, and altered throughout. The
final edition of 1845, however, reverted, in many instances--especially
in the first canto--to the original text of 1819.

As this poem was dedicated to Charles Lamb, it may be of interest to
note that, some six months afterwards, Lamb presented Wordsworth with a
copy of the first edition of 'Paradise Regained' (the edition of 1671),
writing on it the following sentence,

  "Charles Lamb, to the best knower of Milton, and therefore the
  worthiest occupant of this pleasant edition.--Jan. 2nd, 1820."

The opening stanzas are unrivalled in their description of a sultry June
evening, with a thunder-storm imminent.

  ' 'Tis spent--this burning day of June!
  Soft darkness o'er its latest gleams is stealing;
  The buzzing dor-hawk, round and round, is wheeling,--
  That solitary bird
  Is all that can be heard
  In silence deeper far than that of deepest noon!
  ...
  ...
  The mountains against heaven's grave weight
  Rise up, and grow to wondrous height.
  The air, as in a lion's den,
  Is close and hot;--and now and then
  Comes a tired and sultry breeze
  With a haunting and a panting,
  Like the stifling of disease;
  But the dews allay the heat,
  And the silence makes it sweet.'


The Waggoner takes what is now the middle road, of the three leading
from Rydal to Grasmere (see the note to 'The Primrose of the Rock'). The
"craggy hill" referred to in the lines

  'Now he leaves the lower ground,
  And up the craggy hill ascending
  ...
  Steep the way and wearisome,'

is the road from Rydal Quarry up to White Moss Common, with the Glowworm
rock on the right, and the "two heath-clad rocks," referred to in the
last of the "Poems on the Naming of Places," on the left. He next passes
"The Wishing Gate" on the left, John's Grove on the right, and descends
by Dove Cottage--where Wordsworth lived--to Grasmere.

  '... at the bottom of the brow,
  Where once the DOVE and OLIVE-BOUGH
  Offered a greeting of good ale
  To all who entered Grasmere Vale;
  And called on him who must depart
  To leave it with a jovial heart;
  There, where the DOVE and OLIVE-BOUGH
  Once hung, a Poet harbours now,
  A simple water-drinking Bard.'

He goes through Grasmere, passes the Swan Inn,

  'He knows it to his cost, good Man!
  Who does not know the famous SWAN?
  Object uncouth! and yet our boast,
  For it was painted by the Host;
  His own conceit the figure planned,
  'Twas coloured all by his own hand.'

As early as 1819, when the poem was first published, "this rude piece of
self-taught art had been supplanted" by a more pretentious figure. The
Waggoner passes the Swan,

  'And now the conqueror essays
  The long ascent of Dunmail-raise.'

As he proceeds, the storm gathers, and "struggles to get free." Road,
hill, and sky are dark; and he barely sees the well-known rocks at the
summit of Helm-crag, where two figures seem to sit, like those on the
Cobbler, near Arrochar, in Argyle.

  'Black is the sky--and every hill,
  Up to the sky, is blacker still--
  Sky, hill, and dale, one dismal room,
  Hung round and overhung with gloom;
  Save that above a single height
  Is to be seen a lurid light,
  Above Helm-crag--a streak half dead,
  A burning of portentous red;
  And near that lurid light, full well
  The ASTROLOGER, sage Sidrophel,
  Where at his desk and book he sits,
  Puzzling aloft his curious wits;
  He whose domain is held in common
  With no one but the ANCIENT WOMAN,
  Cowering beside her rifted cell,
  As if intent on magic spell;--
  Dread pair, that, spite of wind and weather,
  Still sit upon Helm-crag together!'

At the top of the "raise"--the water-shed between the vales of Grasmere
and Wytheburn--he reaches the familiar pile of stones, at the boundary
between the shires of Westmoreland and Cumberland.

  '... that pile of stones,
  Heaped over brave King Dunmail's bones;
  ...
  Green is the grass for beast to graze,
  Around the stones of Dunmail-raise!'

The allusion to Seat-Sandal laid bare by the flash of lightning, and the
description, in the last canto, of the ascent of the Raise by the
Waggoner on a summer morning, are as true to the spirit of the place as
anything that Wordsworth has written. He tells his friend Lamb, fourteen
years after he wrote the poem of 'The Waggoner,'

  'Yes, I, and all about me here,
  Through all the changes of the year,
  Had seen him through the mountains go,
  In pomp of mist or pomp of snow,
  Majestically huge and slow:
  Or, with a milder grace adorning
  The landscape of a summer's morning;
  While Grasmere smoothed her liquid plain
  The moving image to detain;
  And mighty Fairfield, with a chime
  Of echoes, to his march kept time;
  When little other business stirred,
  And little other sound was heard;
  In that delicious hour of balm,
  Stillness, solitude, and calm,
  While yet the valley is arrayed,
  On this side with a sober shade;
  On that is prodigally bright--
  Crag, lawn, and wood--with rosy light.'

From Dunmail-raise the Waggoner descends to Wytheburn. Externally,

  '... Wytheburn's modest House of prayer,
  As lowly as the lowliest dwelling,'

remains very much as it was in 1805; but the primitive simplicity and
"lowliness" of the chapel was changed by the addition a few years ago of
an apse, by the removal of some of the old rafters, and by the reseating
of the pews.

The Cherry Tree Tavern, where "the village Merry-night" was being
celebrated, still stands on the eastern or Helvellyn side of the road.
It is now a farm-house; but it will be regarded with interest from the
description of the rustic dance, which recalls ('longo intervallo') 'The
Jolly Beggars' of Burns. After two hours' delay at the Cherry Tree, the
Waggoner and Sailor "coast the silent lake" of Thirlmere, and pass the
Rock of Names.

This rock was, until lately, one of the most interesting memorials of
Wordsworth and his friends that survived in the Lake District; but the
vale of Thirlmere is now a Manchester water-tank, and the place which
knew the Rock of Names now knows it no more. It was a sort of trysting
place of the poets of Grasmere and Keswick--being nearly half-way
between the two places--and there, Wordsworth, Coleridge, and other
members of their households often met. When Coleridge left Grasmere for
Keswick, the Wordsworths usually accompanied him as far as this rock;
and they often met him there on his way over from Keswick to Grasmere.
Compare the Hon. Mr. Justice Coleridge's Reminiscences. ('Memoirs of
Wordsworth,' vol. ii. p. 310.)

The rock was on the right hand of the road, a little way past Waterhead,
at the southern end of Thirlmere; and on it were cut the letters,

  W. W.
  M. H.
  D. W.
  S. T. C.
  J. W.
  S. H.

the initials of William Wordsworth, Mary Hutchinson, Dorothy Wordsworth,
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, John Wordsworth, and Sarah Hutchinson. The
Wordsworths settled at Grasmere at the close of the year 1799. As
mentioned in a previous note, John Wordsworth lived with his brother and
sister during most of that winter, and during the whole of the spring,
summer, and autumn of 1800, leaving it finally on September 29, 1800.
These names must therefore have been cut during the spring or summer of
1800. There is no record of the occurrence, and no allusion to the rock,
in Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal of 1800. But that Journal, so
far as I have seen it, begins on the 14th of May 1800. Almost every
detail of the daily life and ways of the household at Dove Cottage is so
minutely recorded in it, that I am convinced that this incident of the
cutting of names in the Thirlmere Rock would have been mentioned, had it
happened between the 14th of May and John Wordsworth's departure from
Grasmere in September. Such references as this, for example, occur in
the Journal:

  "Saturday, August 2.--William and Coleridge went to Keswick. John went
  with them to Wytheburn, and staid all day fishing."

I therefore infer that it was in the spring or early summer of 1800 that
the names were cut.

I may add that the late Dean of Westminster--Dean Stanley--took much
interest in this Rock of Names; and doubt having been cast on the
accuracy of the place and the genuineness of the inscriptions, in a
letter from Dr. Fraser, then Bishop of Manchester, which he forwarded to
me, he entered into the question with all the interest with which he was
wont to track out details in the architecture or the history of a
Church.

There were few memorials connected with Wordsworth more worthy of
preservation than this "upright mural block of stone." When one
remembered that the initials on the rock were graven by the hands of
William and John Wordsworth, by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, possibly with
the assistance of Dorothy Wordsworth, the two Hutchinsons (Mary and
Sarah), and that Wordsworth says of it,

  'We worked until the Initials took
  Shapes that defied a scornful look,'

this Thirlmere Rock was felt to be a far more interesting memento of the
group of poets that used to meet beside it, than the Stone in the
grounds of Rydal Mount, which was spared at Wordsworth's suit, "from
some rude beauty of its own." There was simplicity, as well as strength,
in the way in which the initials were cut. But the stone was afterwards
desecrated by tourists, and others, who had the audacity to scratch
their own names or initials upon it. In 1877 I wrote, "The rock is as
yet wonderfully free from such; and its preservation is probably due to
the dark olive-coloured moss, with which the 'pure water trickling down'
has covered the face of the 'mural block,' and thus secured it from
observation, even on that highway;" but I found in the summer of 1882
that several other names had been ruthlessly added. When the Manchester
Thirlmere scheme was finally resolved upon, an effort was made to remove
the Stone, with the view of its being placed higher up the hill on the
side of the new roadway. In the course of this attempt, the Stone was
broken to pieces.

There is a very good drawing of "The Rock of Names" by Mr. Harry
Goodwin, in 'Through the Wordsworth Country, 1892'.

"The Muse" takes farewell of the Waggoner as he is proceeding with the
Sailor and his quaint model of the 'Vanguard' along the road toward
Keswick. She "scents the morning air," and

  'Quits the slow-paced waggon's side,
  To wander down yon hawthorn dell,
  With murmuring Greta for her guide.'

The "hawthorn dell" is the upper part of the Vale of St. John.

  '--There doth she ken the awful form
  Of Raven-crag--black as a storm--
  Glimmering through the twilight pale;
  And Ghimmer-crag, his tall twin brother,
  Each peering forth to meet the other.'

Raven-crag is well known,--H.C. Robinson writes of it in his 'Diary' in
1818, as "the most significant of the crags at a spot where there is not
one insignificant,"--a rock on the western side of Thirlmere, where the
Greta issues from the lake. But there is no rock in the district now
called by the name of Ghimmer-crag, or the crag of the Ewe-lamb. I am
inclined to think that Wordsworth referred to the "Fisher-crag" of the
Ordnance Survey and the Guide Books. No other rock round Thirlmere can
with any accuracy be called the "tall twin brother" of Raven-crag:
certainly not Great How, nor any spur of High Seat or Bleaberry Fell.
Fisher-crag resembles Raven-crag, as seen from Thirlmere Bridge, or from
the high road above it; and it is somewhat remarkable that Green--in his
Guide to the Lakes (a volume which the poet possessed)--makes use of the
same expression as that which Wordsworth adopts regarding these two
crags, Raven and Fisher.

  "The margin of the lake on the Dalehead side has its charms of wood
  and water; and Fischer Crag, twin brother to Raven Crag, is no bad
  object, when taken near the island called Buck's Holm"

('A Description of Sixty Studies from Nature', by William Green of
Ambleside, 1810, p. 57). I cannot find any topographical allusion to a
Ghimmer-crag in contemporary local writers. Clarke, in his 'Survey of
the Lakes', does not mention it.

The Castle Rock, in the Vale of Legberthwaite, between High Fell and
Great How, is the fairy castle of Sir Walter Scott's 'Bridal of
Triermain'. "Nathdale Fell" is the ridge between Naddle Vale (Nathdale
Vale) and that of St. John, now known as High Rigg. The old Hall of
Threlkeld has long been in a state of ruinous dilapidation, the only
habitable part of it having been for many years converted into a
farmhouse. The remaining local allusions in 'The Waggoner' are obvious
enough: Castrigg is the shortened form of Castlerigg, the ridge between
Naddle Valley and Keswick.

In the "Reminiscences" of Wordsworth, which the Hon. Mr. Justice
Coleridge wrote for the late Bishop of Lincoln, in 1850, there is the
following reference to 'The Waggoner'. (See 'Memoirs', vol. ii. p. 310.)

  "'The Waggoner' seems a very favourite poem of his. He said his object
  in it had not been understood. It was a play of the fancy on a
  domestic incident, and lowly character. He wished by the opening
  descriptive lines to put his reader into the state of mind in which he
  wished it to be read. If he failed in doing that, he wished him to lay
  it down. He pointed out with the same view, the glowing lines on the
  state of exultation in which Ben and his companions are under the
  influence of liquor. Then he read the sickening languor of the morning
  walk, contrasted with the glorious uprising of Nature, and the songs
  of the birds. Here he has added about six most exquisite lines."

The lines referred to are doubtless the eight (p. 101), beginning

  'Say more; for by that power a vein,'

which were added in the edition of 1836.

The following is Sara Coleridge's criticism of 'The Waggoner'. (See
'Biographia Literaria', vol. ii. pp. 183, 184, edition 1847.)

  "Due honour is done to 'Peter Bell', at this time, by students of
  poetry in general; but some, even of Mr. Wordsworth's greatest
  admirers, do not quite satisfy me in their admiration of 'The
  Waggoner', a poem which my dear uncle, Mr. Southey, preferred even to
  the former. 'Ich will meine Denkungs Art hierin niemandem aufdringen',
  as Lessing says: I will force my way of thinking on nobody, but take
  the liberty, for my own gratification, to express it. The sketches of
  hill and valley in this poem have a lightness, and spirit--an Allegro
  touch--distinguishing them from the grave and elevated splendour which
  characterises Mr. Wordsworth's representations of Nature in general,
  and from the passive tenderness of those in 'The White Doe', while it
  harmonises well with the human interest of the piece; indeed it is the
  harmonious sweetness of the composition which is most dwelt upon by
  its special admirers. In its course it describes, with bold brief
  touches, the striking mountain tract from Grasmere to Keswick; it
  commences with an evening storm among the mountains, presents a lively
  interior of a country inn during midnight, and concludes after
  bringing us in sight of St. John's Vale and the Vale of Keswick seen
  by day-break--'Skiddaw touched with rosy light,' and the prospect from
  Nathdale Fell 'hoar with the frost-like dews of dawn:' thus giving a
  beautiful and well-contrasted Panorama, produced by the most delicate
  and masterly strokes of the pencil. Well may Mr. Ruskin, a fine
  observer and eloquent describer of various classes of natural
  appearances, speak of Mr. Wordsworth as the great poetic landscape
  painter of the age. But Mr. Ruskin has found how seldom the great
  landscape painters are powerful in expressing human passions and
  affections on canvas, or even successful in the introduction of human
  figures into their foregrounds; whereas in the poetic paintings of Mr.
  Wordsworth the landscape is always subordinate to a higher interest;
  certainly, in 'The Waggoner', the little sketch of human nature which
  occupies, as it were, the front of that encircling background, the
  picture of Benjamin and his temptations, his humble friends and the
  mute companions of his way, has a character of its own, combining with
  sportiveness a homely pathos, which must ever be delightful to some of
  those who are thoroughly conversant with the spirit of Mr.
  Wordsworth's poetry. It may be compared with the ale-house scene in
  'Tam o'Shanter', parts of Voss's Luise, or Ovid's Baucis and Philemon;
  though it differs from each of them as much as they differ from each
  other. The Epilogue carries on the feeling of the piece very
  beautifully."

The editor of Southey's 'Life and Correspondence'--his son, the Rev.
Charles Cuthbert Southey--tells us, in a note to a letter from S.T.
Coleridge to his father, that the Waggoner's name was Jackson; and that
"all the circumstances of the poem are accurately correct." This
Jackson, after retiring from active work as waggoner, became the tenant
of Greta Hall, where first Coleridge, and afterwards Southey lived. The
Hall was divided into two houses, one of which Jackson occupied, and the
other of which he let to Coleridge, who speaks thus of him in the letter
to Southey, dated Greta Hall, Keswick, April 13, 1801:

  "My landlord, who dwells next door, has a very respectable library,
  which he has put with mine; histories, encyclopedias, and all the
  modern poetry, etc. etc. etc. A more truly disinterested man I never
  met with; severely frugal, yet almost carelessly generous; and yet he
  got all his money as a common carrier, by hard labour, and by pennies
  and pennies. He is one instance among many in this country of the
  salutary effect of the love of knowledge--he was from a boy a lover of
  learning."

(See 'Life and Correspondence of Robert Southey,' vol. ii. pp. 147,
148.)

Charles Lamb--to whom 'The Waggoner' was dedicated--wrote thus to
Wordsworth on 7th June 1819:

  "My dear Wordsworth,--You cannot imagine how proud we are here of the
  dedication. We read it twice for once that we do the poem. I mean all
  through; yet 'Benjamin' is no common favourite; there is a spirit of
  beautiful tolerance in it. It is as good as it was in 1806; and it
  will be as good in 1829, if our dim eyes shall be awake to peruse it.
  Methinks there is a kind of shadowing affinity between the subject of
  the narrative and the subject of the dedication.
   ...
  "I do not know which I like best,--the prologue (the latter part
  especially) to 'P. Bell,' or the epilogue to 'Benjamin.' Yes, I tell
  stories; I do know I like the last best; and the 'Waggoner' altogether
  is a pleasanter remembrance to me than the 'Itinerant.'
  ...
  "C. LAMB."

(See 'The Letters of Charles Lamb,' edited by Alfred Ainger, vol. ii.
pp. 24-26.)

To this may be added what Southey wrote to Mr. Wade Browne on 15th June
1819:

  "I think you will be pleased with Wordsworth's 'Waggoner', if it were
  only for the line of road which it describes. The master of the waggon
  was my poor landlord Jackson, and the cause of his exchanging it for
  the one-horse cart was just as is represented in the poem; nobody but
  Benjamin could manage it upon these hills, and Benjamin could not
  resist the temptations by the wayside."

(See 'The Life and Correspondence of Robert Southey', vol. iv. p.
318.)--Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE PRELUDE,

OR, GROWTH OF A POET'S MIND;

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL POEM


Composed 1799-1805.--Published 1850


ADVERTISEMENT

The following Poem was commenced in the beginning of the year 1799, and
completed in the summer of 1805.

The design and occasion of the work are described by the Author in his
Preface to the EXCURSION, first published in 1814, where he thus speaks:

  "Several years ago, when the Author retired to his native mountains
  with the hope of being enabled to construct a literary work that might
  live, it was a reasonable thing that he should take a review of his
  own mind, and examine how far Nature and Education had qualified him
  for such an employment.

  "As subsidiary to this preparation, he undertook to record, in verse,
  the origin and progress of his own powers, as far as he was acquainted
  with them.

  "That work, addressed to a dear friend, most distinguished for his
  knowledge and genius, and to whom the author's intellect is deeply
  indebted, has been long finished; and the result of the investigation
  which gave rise to it, was a determination to compose a philosophical
  Poem, containing views of Man, Nature, and Society, and to be entitled
  'The Recluse;' as having for its principal subject the sensations and
  opinions of a poet living in retirement.

  "The preparatory poem is biographical, and conducts the history of the
  Author's mind to the point when he was emboldened to hope that his
  faculties were sufficiently matured for entering upon the arduous
  labour which he had proposed to himself; and the two works have the
  same kind of relation to each other, if he may so express himself, as
  the Ante-chapel has to the body of a Gothic Church. Continuing this
  allusion, he may be permitted to add, that his minor pieces, which
  have been long before the public, when they shall be properly
  arranged, will be found by the attentive reader to have such
  connection with the main work as may give them claim to be likened to
  the little cells, oratories, and sepulchral recesses, ordinarily
  included in those edifices."

Such was the Author's language in the year 1814.

It will thence be seen, that the present Poem was intended to be
introductory to the RECLUSE, and that the RECLUSE, if completed, would
have consisted of Three Parts. Of these, the Second Part alone, viz. the
EXCURSION, was finished, and given to the world by the Author.

The First Book of the First Part of the RECLUSE still remains in
manuscript; but the Third Part was only planned. The materials of which
it would have been formed have, however, been incorporated, for the most
part, in the Author's other Publications, written subsequently to the
EXCURSION.

The Friend, to whom the present Poem is addressed, was the late SAMUEL
TAYLOR COLERIDGE, who was resident in Malta, for the restoration of his
health, when the greater part of it was composed.

Mr. Coleridge read a considerable portion of the Poem while he was
abroad; and his feelings, on hearing it recited by the Author (after his
return to his own country) are recorded in his Verses, addressed to Mr.
Wordsworth, which will be found in the 'Sibylline Leaves,' p. 197,
edition 1817, or 'Poetical Works, by S. T. Coleridge,' vol. i. p. 206.

RYDAL MOUNT, _July 13th_, 1850.


This "advertisement" to the first edition of 'The Prelude,' published in
1850--the year of Wordsworth's death--was written by Mr. Carter, who
edited the volume. Mr. Carter was for many years the poet's secretary,
and afterwards one of his literary executors. The poem was not only kept
back from publication during Wordsworth's life-time, but it remained
without a title; being alluded to by himself, when he spoke or wrote of
it, as "the poem on my own poetical education," the "poem on my own
life," etc.

As 'The Prelude' is autobiographical, a large part of Wordsworth's life
might be written in the notes appended to it; but, besides breaking up
the text of the poem unduly, this plan has many disadvantages, and would
render a subsequent and detailed life of the poet either unnecessary or
repetitive. The notes which follow will therefore be limited to the
explanation of local, historical, and chronological allusions, or to
references to Wordsworth's own career that are not obvious without them.
It has been occasionally difficult to decide whether some of the
allusions, to minute points in ancient history, mediaeval mythology, and
contemporary politics, should be explained or left alone; but I have
preferred to err on the side of giving a brief clue to details, with
which every scholar is familiar.

'The Prelude' was begun as Wordsworth left the imperial city of Goslar,
in Lower Saxony, where he spent part of the last winter of last century,
and which he left on the 10th of February 1799. Only lines 1 to 45,
however, were composed at that time; and the poem was continued at
desultory intervals after the settlement at Grasmere, during 1800, and
following years. Large portions of it were dictated to his devoted
amanuenses as he walked, or sat, on the terraces of Lancrigg. Six books
were finished by 1805.

  "The seventh was begun in the opening of that year; ... and the
  remaining seven were written before the end of June 1805, when his
  friend Coleridge was in the island of Malta, for the restoration of
  his health."

(The late Bishop of Lincoln.)

There is no uncertainty as to the year in which the later books were
written; but there is considerable difficulty in fixing the precise date
of the earlier ones. Writing from Grasmere to his friend Francis
Wrangham--the letter is undated--Wordsworth says,

  "I am engaged in writing a poem on my own earlier life, which will
  take five parts or books to complete, three of which are nearly
  finished."

The late Bishop of Lincoln supposed that this letter to Wrangham was
written "at the close of 1803, or beginning of 1804." (See 'Memoirs of
Wordsworth,' vol. i. p. 303.) There is evidence that it belongs to 1804.
At the commencement of the seventh book, p. 247, he says:

  _Six changeful years_ have vanished since I first
  Poured out (saluted by that quickening breeze
  Which met me issuing from the City's walls)
  _A glad preamble to this Verse:_ I sang
  Aloud, with fervour irresistible
  Of short-lived transport, like a torrent bursting,
  From a black thunder-cloud, down Scafell's side
  To rush and disappear. But soon broke forth
  (So willed the Muse) _a less impetuous stream,
  That flowed awhile with unabating strength,
  Then stopped for years; not audible again
  Before last primrose-time._

I have _italicised_ the clauses which give some clue to the dates of
composition. From these it would appear that the "glad preamble,"
written on leaving Goslar in 1799 (which, I think, included only the
first two paragraphs of book first), was a "short-lived transport"; but
that "soon" afterwards "a less impetuous stream" broke forth, which,
after the settlement at Grasmere, "flowed awhile with unabating
strength," and then "stopped for years." Now the above passage,
recording these things, was written in 1805, and in the late autumn of
that year; (as is evident from the reference which immediately follows
to the "choir of redbreasts" and the approach of winter). We must
therefore assign the flowing of the "less impetuous stream," to 1802; in
order to leave room for the intervening "years," in which it ceased to
flow, till it was audible again in the spring of 1804, "last
primrose-time."

A second reference to date occurs in the sixth book, p. 224, entitled
"Cambridge and the Alps," in which he says,

  _Four years and thirty, told, this very week,_
  Have I been now a sojourner on earth.

This fixes definitely enough the date of the composition of _that_ part
of the work, _viz._ April 1804, which corresponds exactly to the "last
primrose-time" of the previous extract from the seventh book, in which
he tells us that after its long silence, his Muse was heard again. So
far Wordsworth's own allusions to the date of 'The Prelude.'

But there are others supplied by his own, and his sister's letters, and
also by the Grasmere Journal. In the Dove Cottage household it was
known, and talked of, as "the Poem to Coleridge;" and Dorothy records,
on 11th January 1803, that her brother was working at it. On 13th
February 1804, she writes to Mrs. Clarkson that her brother was engaged
on a poem on his own life, and was "going on with great rapidity." On
the 6th of March 1804, Wordsworth wrote from Grasmere to De Quincey,

  "I am now writing a poem on my own earlier life: I have just finished
  that part of it in which I speak of my residence at the University."
  ... It is "better than half complete, viz. four books, amounting to
  about 2500 lines."[A]

On the 24th of March, Dorothy wrote to Mrs. Clarkson, that since
Coleridge left them (which was in January 1804), her brother had added
1500 lines to the poem on his own life. On the 29th of April 1804,
Wordsworth wrote to Richard Sharpe,

  "I have been very busy these last ten weeks: having written between
  two and three thousand lines--accurately near three thousand--in that
  time; namely, four books, and a third of another. I am at present at
  the Seventh Book."

On the 25th December 1804, he wrote to Sir George Beaumont,

  "I have written upwards of 2000 verses during the last ten weeks."

We thus find that Books I. to IV. had been written by the 6th of March
1804, that from the 19th February to the 29th of April nearly 3000 lines
were written, that March and April were specially productive months, for
by the 29th April he had reached Book VII. while from 16th October to
25th December he wrote over 2000 lines.

Dorothy and Mary Wordsworth transcribed the earlier books more than
once, and a copy of some of them was given to Coleridge to take with him
to Malta.

It is certain that the remaining books of 'The Prelude' were all written
in the spring and early summer of 1805; the seventh, eighth, ninth,
tenth, eleventh, and part of the twelfth being finished about the middle
of April; the last 300 lines of book twelfth in the last week of April;
and the two remaining books--the thirteenth and fourteenth--before the
20th of May. The following extracts from letters of Wordsworth to Sir
George Beaumont make this clear, and also cast light on matters much
more important than the mere dates of composition.

  GRASMERE, Dec. 25, 1804.

  "My dear Sir George,--You will be pleased to hear that I have been
  advancing with my work: I have written upwards of 2000 verses during
  the last ten weeks. I do not know if you are exactly acquainted with
  the plan of my poetical labour: It is twofold; first, a Poem, to be
  called 'The Recluse;' in which it will be my object to express in
  verse my most interesting feelings concerning man, nature, and
  society; and next, a poem (in which I am at present chiefly engaged)
  on _my earlier life, or the growth of my own mind,_ taken up upon a
  large scale. This latter work I expect to have finished before the
  month of May; and then I purpose to fall with all my might on the
  former, which is the chief object upon which my thoughts have been
  fixed these many years. Of this poem, that of 'The Pedlar,' which
  Coleridge read to you, is part; and I may have written of it
  altogether about 2000 lines. It will consist, I hope, of about ten or
  twelve thousand."


  GRASMERE, May 1, 1805.

  "Unable to proceed with this work, [B] I turned my thoughts again to
  the 'Poem on my own Life', and you will be glad to hear that I have
  added 300 lines to it in the course of last week. Two books more will
  conclude it. It will not be much less than 9000 lines,--not hundred
  but thousand lines long,--an alarming length! and a thing
  unprecedented in literary history that a man should talk so much about
  himself. It is not self-conceit, as you will know well, that has
  induced me to do this, but real humility. I began the work because I
  was _unprepared_ to treat _any more arduous subject_, and _diffident
  of my own powers_. Here, at least, I hoped that to a certain degree I
  should be sure of succeeding, as I had nothing to do but describe what
  I had felt and thought, and therefore could not easily be bewildered.
  This might have been done in narrower compass by a man of more
  address; but I have done my best. If, when the work shall be finished,
  it appears to the judicious to have redundancies, they shall be lopped
  off, if possible; but this is very difficult to do, when a man has
  written with thought; and this defect, whenever I have suspected it or
  found it to exist in any writings of mine, I have always found it
  incurable. The fault lies too deep, and is in the first conception."


  GRASMERE, June 3, 1805.

  "I have the pleasure to say that I _finished my poem_ about a
  fortnight ago. I had looked forward to the day as a most happy one;
  ... But it was not a happy day for me; I was dejected on many
  accounts: when I looked back upon the performance, it seemed to have a
  dead weight about it,--the reality so far short of the expectation. It
  was the first long labour that I had finished; and the doubt whether I
  should ever live to write 'The Recluse', and the sense which I had of
  this poem being so far below what I seemed capable of executing,
  depressed me much; above all, many heavy thoughts of my poor departed
  brother hung upon me, the joy which I should have had in showing him
  the manuscript, and a thousand other vain fancies and dreams. I have
  spoken of this, because it was a state of feeling new to me, the
  occasion being new. This work may be considered as a sort of _portico_
  to 'The Recluse', part of the same building, which I hope to be able,
  ere long, to begin with in earnest; and if I am permitted to bring it
  to a conclusion, and to write, further, a narrative poem of the epic
  kind, I shall consider the task of my life as over. I ought to add,
  that I have the satisfaction of finding the present poem not quite of
  so alarming a length as I apprehended."


These letters explain the delay in the publication of 'The Prelude'.
They show that what led Wordsworth to write so much about himself was
not self-conceit, but self-diffidence. He felt unprepared as yet for the
more arduous task he had set before himself. He saw its faults as
clearly, or more clearly, than the critics who condemned him. He knew
that its length was excessive. He tried to condense it; he kept it
beside him unpublished, and occasionally revised it, with a view to
condensation, in vain. The text received his final corrections in the
year 1832.

Wordsworth's reluctance to publish these portions of his great poem,
'The Recluse', other than 'The Excursion', during his lifetime, was a
matter of surprise to his friends; to whom he, or the ladies of his
household, had read portions of it. In the year 1819, Charles Lamb wrote
to him,

  "If, as you say, 'The Waggoner', in some sort, came at my call, oh for
  a potent voice to call forth 'The Recluse' from his profound
  dormitory, where he sleeps forgetful of his foolish charge--the
  world!"

('The Letters of Charles Lamb', edited by Alfred Ainger, vol. ii. p.
26.)

The admission made in the letter of May 1st, 1805, is note-worthy:

  "This defect" (of redundancy) "whenever I have suspected it or found
  it to exist in any writings of mine, _I have always found incurable.
  The fault lies too deep, and is in the first conception_."

The actual result--in the Poem he had at length committed to
writing--was so far inferior to the ideal he had tried to realise, that
he could never be induced to publish it. He spoke of the MS. as forming
a sort of _portico_ to his larger work--the poem on Man, Nature, and
Society--which he meant to call 'The Recluse', and of which one portion
only, _viz._ 'The Excursion', was finished. It is clear that throughout
the composition of 'The Prelude', he felt that he was experimenting with
his powers. He wished to find out whether he could construct "a literary
work that might live," on a larger scale than his Lyrics; and it was on
the writing of a "philosophical poem," dealing with Man and Nature, in
their deepest aspects, that his thoughts had been fixed for many years.
From the letter to Sir George Beaumont, December 25, 1804, it is evident
that he regarded the autobiographical poem as a mere prologue to this
larger work, to which he hoped to turn "with all his might" after 'The
Prelude' was finished, and of which he had already written about a fifth
or a sixth (see 'Memoirs', vol. i. p. 304). This was the part known in
the Grasmere household as "The Pedlar," a title given to it from the
character of the Wanderer, but afterwards happily set aside. He did not
devote himself, however, to the completion of his wider purpose,
immediately after 'The Prelude' was finished. He wrote one book of 'The
Recluse' which he called "Home at Grasmere"; and, though detached from
'The Prelude', it is a continuation of the narrative of his own life at
the point where it is left off in the latter poem. It consists of 733
lines. Two extracts from it were published in the 'Memoirs of
Wordsworth' in 1851 (vol. i. pp. 151 and 155), beginning,

  'On Nature's invitation do I come,'

and

  'Bleak season was it, turbulent and bleak.'

These will be found in vol. ii. of this edition, pp. 118 and 121
respectively.

The autobiographical poem remained, as already stated, during
Wordsworth's lifetime without a title. The name finally adopted--'The
Prelude'--was suggested by Mrs. Wordsworth, both to indicate its
relation to the larger work, and the fact of its having been written
comparatively early.

As the poem was addressed to Coleridge, it may be desirable to add in
this place his critical verdict upon it; along with the poem which he
wrote, on hearing Wordsworth read a portion of it to him, in the winter
of 1806, at Coleorton.

In his 'Table Talk' (London, 1835, vol. ii. p. 70), Coleridge's opinion
is recorded thus:

  "I cannot help regretting that Wordsworth did not first publish his
  thirteen (fourteen) books on the growth of an individual
  mind--superior, as I used to think, upon the whole to 'The Excursion'.
  You may judge how I felt about them by my own Poem upon the occasion.
  Then the plan laid out, and, I believe, partly suggested by me, was,
  that Wordsworth should assume the station of a man in mental repose,
  one whose principles were made up, and so prepared to deliver upon
  authority a system of philosophy. He was to treat man as man,--a
  subject of eye, ear, touch, and taste in contact with external nature,
  and informing the senses from the mind, and not compounding a mind out
  of the senses; then he was to describe the pastoral and other states
  of society, assuming something of the Juvenalian spirit as he
  approached the high civilisation of cities and towns, and opening a
  melancholy picture of the present state of degeneracy and vice; thence
  he was to infer and reveal the proof of, and necessity for, the whole
  state of man and society being subject to, and illustrative of a
  redemptive process in operation, showing how this idea reconciled all
  the anomalies, and promised future glory and restoration. Something of
  this sort was, I think, agreed on. It is, in substance, what I have
  been all my life doing in my system of philosophy.

  "I think Wordsworth possessed more of the genius of a great
  Philosopher than any man I ever knew, or, as I believe, has existed in
  England since Milton; but it seems to me that he ought never to have
  abandoned the contemplative position which is peculiarly--perhaps, I
  might say exclusively--fitted for him. His proper title is 'Spectator
  ab extra'."

The following are Coleridge's Lines addressed to Wordsworth:

  TO WILLIAM WORDSWORTH

  COMPOSED ON THE NIGHT AFTER HIS RECITATION OF A POEM ON THE GROWTH OF
  AN INDIVIDUAL MIND


  Friend of the wise! and teacher of the good!
  Into my heart have I received that lay
  More than historic, that prophetic lay
  Wherein (high theme by thee first sung aright)
  Of the foundations and the building up
  Of a Human Spirit thou hast dared to tell
  What may be told, to the understanding mind
  Revealable; and what within the mind
  By vital breathings secret as the soul
  Of vernal growth, oft quickens in the heart
  Thoughts all too deep for words!--
             Theme hard as high,
  Of smiles spontaneous, and mysterious fears
  (The first-born they of Reason and twin-birth),
  Of tides obedient to external force,
  And currents self-determined, as might seem,
  Or by some inner power; of moments awful,
  Now in thy inner life, and now abroad,
  When power streamed from thee, and thy soul received
  The Light reflected, as a light bestowed--
  Of fancies fair, and milder hours of youth,
  Hyblean murmurs of poetic thought
  Industrious in its joy, in vales and glens,
  Native or outland, lakes and famous hills!
  Or on the lonely high-road, when the stars
  Were rising; or by secret mountain-streams,
  The guides and the companions of thy way!
  Of more than Fancy, of the Social Sense
  Distending wide, and man beloved as man,
  Where France in all her towns lay vibrating
  Like some becalmed bark beneath the burst
  Of Heaven's immediate thunder, when no cloud
  Is visible, or shadow on the main.
  For thou wert there, thine own brows garlanded,
  Amid the tremor of a realm aglow,
  Amid a mighty nation jubilant,
  When from the general heart of humankind
  Hope sprang forth like a full-born Deity!
--Of that dear Hope afflicted and struck down,
  So summoned homeward, thenceforth calm and sure,
  From the dread watch-tower of man's absolute self,
  With light unwaning on her eyes, to look
  Far on--herself a glory to behold.
  The Angel of the vision! Then (last strain)
  Of Duty, chosen laws controlling choice,
  Action and joy!--An Orphic song indeed,
  A song divine of high and passionate thoughts
  To their own music chanted!
                             O great Bard!
  Ere yet that last strain dying awed the air,
  With stedfast eye I viewed thee in the choir
  Of ever-enduring men. The truly great
  Have all one age, and from one visible space
  Shed influence! They, both in power and act,
  Are permanent, and Time is not with them,
  Save as it worketh for them, they in it.
  Nor less a sacred roll, than those of old,
  And to be placed, as they, with gradual fame
  Among the archives of mankind, thy work
  Makes audible a linked lay of Truth,
  Of Truth profound a sweet continuous lay,
  Not learnt, but native, her own natural notes!
  Ah! as I listened with a heart forlorn,
  The pulses of my being beat anew:
  And even as life returns upon the drowned,
  Life's joy rekindling roused a throng of pains--
  Keen pangs of Love, awakening as a babe
  Turbulent, with an outcry in the heart;
  And fears self-willed, that shunned the eye of hope;
  And hope that scarce would know itself from fear;
  Sense of past youth, and manhood come in vain,
  And genius given, and knowledge won in vain;
  And all which I had culled in wood-walks wild,
  And all which patient toil had reared, and all,
  Commune with thee had opened out--but flowers
  Strewed on my corse, and borne upon my bier,
  In the same coffin, for the self-same grave!

  ...   Eve following eve,
  Dear tranquil time, when the sweet sense of Home
  Is sweetest! moments for their own sake hailed,
  And more desired, more precious for thy song,
  In silence listening, like a devout child,
  My soul lay passive, by thy various strain
  Driven as in surges now beneath the stars,
  With momentary stars of my own birth,
  Fair constellated foam, [C] still darting off
  Into the darkness; now a tranquil sea,
  Outspread and bright, yet swelling to the moon.

    And when--O Friend! my comforter and guide!
  Strong in thyself, and powerful to give strength!--
  Thy long-sustained Song finally closed,
  And thy deep voice had ceased--yet thou thyself
  Wert still before my eyes, and round us both
  That happy vision of beloved faces--
  Scarce conscious, and yet conscious of its close
  I sate, my being blended in one thought
  (Thought was it? or aspiration? or resolve?)
  Absorbed, yet hanging still upon the sound--
  And when I rose I found myself in prayer.


It was at Coleorton, in Leicestershire,--where the Wordsworths lived
during the winter of 1806-7, in a farm-house belonging to Sir George
Beaumont, and where Coleridge visited them,--that 'The Prelude' was read
aloud by its author, on the occasion which gave birth to these
lines.--Ed.


[Footnote A: See the 'De Quincey Memorials,' vol. i. p. 125.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: A poem on his brother John.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare

  "A beautiful white cloud of foam at momentary intervals, coursed by
  the side of the vessel with a roar, and little stars of flame danced
  and sparkled and went out in it: and every now and then light
  detachments of this white cloud-like foam darted off from the vessel's
  side, each with its own small constellation, over the sea, and scoured
  out of sight like a Tartar troop over a wilderness."

S. T. C. in 'Biographia Literaria', Satyrane's Letters, letter i. p. 196
(edition 1817).--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK FIRST


INTRODUCTION.--CHILDHOOD AND SCHOOL-TIME


  O there is blessing in this gentle breeze,
  A visitant that while it fans my cheek
  Doth seem half-conscious of the joy it brings
  From the green fields, and from yon azure sky.
  Whate'er its mission, the soft breeze can come                       5
  To none more grateful than to me; escaped
  From the vast city, [A] where I long had pined
  A discontented sojourner: now free,
  Free as a bird to settle where I will.
  What dwelling shall receive me? in what vale                        10
  Shall be my harbour? underneath what grove
  Shall I take up my home? and what clear stream
  Shall with its murmur lull me into rest?
  The earth is all before me. [B] With a heart
  Joyous, nor scared at its own liberty,                              15
  I look about; and should the chosen guide
  Be nothing better than a wandering cloud,
  I cannot miss my way. I breathe again!
  Trances of thought and mountings of the mind
  Come fast upon me: it is shaken off,                                20
  That burthen of my own unnatural self,
  The heavy weight of many a weary day [C]
  Not mine, and such as were not made for me.
  Long months of peace (if such bold word accord
  With any promises of human life),                                   25
  Long months of ease and undisturbed delight
  Are mine in prospect; whither shall I turn,
  By road or pathway, or through trackless field,
  Up hill or down, or shall some floating thing
  Upon the river point me out my course?                              30

    Dear Liberty! Yet what would it avail
  But for a gift that consecrates the joy?
  For I, methought, while the sweet breath of heaven
  Was blowing on my body, felt within
  A correspondent breeze, that gently moved                           35
  With quickening virtue, but is now become
  A tempest, a redundant energy,
  Vexing its own creation. Thanks to both,
  And their congenial powers, that, while they join
  In breaking up a long-continued frost,                              40
  Bring with them vernal promises, the hope
  Of active days urged on by flying hours,--
  Days of sweet leisure, taxed with patient thought
  Abstruse, nor wanting punctual service high,
  Matins and vespers of harmonious verse!                             45

    Thus far, O Friend! [D] did I, not used to make
  A present joy the matter of a song,
  Pour forth that day my soul in measured strains
  That would not be forgotten, and are here
  Recorded: to the open fields I told                                 50
  A prophecy: poetic numbers came
  Spontaneously to clothe in priestly robe
  A renovated spirit singled out,
  Such hope was mine, for holy services.
  My own voice cheered me, and, far more, the mind's                  55
  Internal echo of the imperfect sound;
  To both I listened, drawing from them both
  A cheerful confidence in things to come.

    Content and not unwilling now to give
  A respite to this passion, I paced on                               60
  With brisk and eager steps; and came, at length,
  To a green shady place, [E] where down I sate
  Beneath a tree, slackening my thoughts by choice,
  And settling into gentler happiness.
  'Twas autumn, and a clear and placid day,                           65
  With warmth, as much as needed, from a sun
  Two hours declined towards the west; a day
  With silver clouds, and sunshine on the grass,
  And in the sheltered and the sheltering grove
  A perfect stillness. Many were the thoughts                         70
  Encouraged and dismissed, till choice was made
  Of a known Vale, [F] whither my feet should turn,
  Nor rest till they had reached the very door
  Of the one cottage [G] which methought I saw.
  No picture of mere memory ever looked                               75
  So fair; and while upon the fancied scene
  I gazed with growing love, a higher power
  Than Fancy gave assurance of some work
  Of glory there forthwith to be begun,
  Perhaps too there performed. Thus long I mused,                     80
  Nor e'er lost sight of what I mused upon,
  Save when, amid the stately groves of oaks,
  Now here, now there, an acorn, from its cup
  Dislodged, through sere leaves rustled, or at once
  To the bare earth dropped with a startling sound.                   85
  From that soft couch I rose not, till the sun
  Had almost touched the horizon; casting then
  A backward glance upon the curling cloud
  Of city smoke, by distance ruralised;
  Keen as a Truant or a Fugitive,                                     90
  But as a Pilgrim resolute, I took,
  Even with the chance equipment of that hour,
  The road that pointed toward the chosen Vale. [F]
  It was a splendid evening, and my soul
  Once more made trial of her strength, nor lacked                    95
  AEolian visitations; but the harp
  Was soon defrauded, and the banded host
  Of harmony dispersed in straggling sounds,
  And lastly utter silence! "Be it so;
  Why think of any thing but present good?" [H]                      100
  So, like a home-bound labourer I pursued
  My way beneath the mellowing sun, that shed
  Mild influence; nor left in me one wish
  Again to bend the Sabbath of that time
  To a servile yoke. What need of many words?                        105
  A pleasant loitering journey, through three days
  Continued, brought me to my hermitage, [I]
  I spare to tell of what ensued, the life
  In common things--the endless store of things,
  Rare, or at least so seeming, every day                            110
  Found all about me in one neighbourhood--
  The self-congratulation, and, from morn
  To night, unbroken cheerfulness serene. [K]
  But speedily an earnest longing rose
  To brace myself to some determined aim,                            115
  Reading or thinking; either to lay up
  New stores, or rescue from decay the old
  By timely interference: and therewith
  Came hopes still higher, that with outward life
  I might endue some airy phantasies                                 120
  That had been floating loose about for years,
  And to such beings temperately deal forth
  The many feelings that oppressed my heart.
  That hope hath been discouraged; welcome light
  Dawns from the east, but dawns to disappear                        125
  And mock me with a sky that ripens not
  Into a steady morning: if my mind,
  Remembering the bold promise of the past,
  Would gladly grapple with some noble theme,
  Vain is her wish; where'er she turns she finds                     130
  Impediments from day to day renewed.

    And now it would content me to yield up
  Those lofty hopes awhile, for present gifts
  Of humbler industry. But, oh, dear Friend!
  The Poet, gentle creature as he is,                                135
  Hath, like the Lover, his unruly times;
  His fits when he is neither sick nor well,
  Though no distress be near him but his own
  Unmanageable thoughts: his mind, best pleased
  While she as duteous as the mother dove                            140
  Sits brooding, lives not always to that end,
  But like the innocent bird, hath goadings on
  That drive her as in trouble through the groves; [L]
  With me is now such passion, to be blamed
  No otherwise than as it lasts too long.                            145

    When, as becomes a man who would prepare
  For such an arduous work, I through myself
  Make rigorous inquisition, the report
  Is often cheering; for I neither seem
  To lack that first great gift, the vital soul,                     150
  Nor general Truths, which are themselves a sort
  Of Elements and Agents, Under-powers,
  Subordinate helpers of the living mind:
  Nor am I naked of external things,
  Forms, images, nor numerous other aids                             155
  Of less regard, though won perhaps with toil
  And needful to build up a Poet's praise.
  Time, place, and manners do I seek, and these
  Are found in plenteous store, but nowhere such
  As may be singled out with steady choice;                          160
  No little band of yet remembered names
  Whom I, in perfect confidence, might hope
  To summon back from lonesome banishment,
  And make them dwellers in the hearts of men
  Now living, or to live in future years.                            165
  Sometimes the ambitious Power of choice, mistaking
  Proud spring-tide swellings for a regular sea,
  Will settle on some British theme, some old
  Romantic tale by Milton left unsung;
  More often turning to some gentle place                            170
  Within the groves of Chivalry, I pipe
  To shepherd swains, or seated harp in hand,
  Amid reposing knights by a river side
  Or fountain, listen to the grave reports
  Of dire enchantments faced and overcome                            175
  By the strong mind, and tales of warlike feats,
  Where spear encountered spear, and sword with sword
  Fought, as if conscious of the blazonry
  That the shield bore, so glorious was the strife;
  Whence inspiration for a song that winds                           180
  Through ever changing scenes of votive quest
  Wrongs to redress, harmonious tribute paid
  To patient courage and unblemished truth,
  To firm devotion, zeal unquenchable,
  And Christian meekness hallowing faithful loves.                   185
  Sometimes, more sternly moved, I would relate
  How vanquished Mithridates northward passed,
  And, hidden in the cloud of years, became
  Odin, the Father of a race by whom
  Perished the Roman Empire: [M] how the friends                     190
  And followers of Sertorius, [N] out of Spain
  Flying, found shelter in the Fortunate Isles, [O]
  And left their usages, their arts and laws,
  To disappear by a slow gradual death,
  To dwindle and to perish one by one,                               195
  Starved in those narrow bounds: [P] but not the soul
  Of Liberty, which fifteen hundred years
  Survived, and, when the European came
  With skill and power that might not be withstood,
  Did, like a pestilence, maintain its hold                          200
  And wasted down by glorious death that race
  Of natural heroes: or I would record
  How, in tyrannic times, some high-souled man,
  Unnamed among the chronicles of kings,
  Suffered in silence for Truth's sake: or tell,                     205
  How that one Frenchman, [Q] through continued force
  Of meditation on the inhuman deeds
  Of those who conquered first the Indian Isles,
  Went single in his ministry across
  The Ocean; not to comfort the oppressed,                           210
  But, like a thirsty wind, to roam about
  Withering the Oppressor: how Gustavus sought
  Help at his need in Dalecarlia's mines: [R]
  How Wallace fought for Scotland; left the name
  Of Wallace to be found, like a wild flower,                        215
  All over his dear Country; [S] left the deeds
  Of Wallace, like a family of Ghosts,
  To people the steep rocks and river banks,
  Her natural sanctuaries, with a local soul
  Of independence and stern liberty.                                 220
  Sometimes it suits me better to invent
  A tale from my own heart, more near akin
  To my own passions and habitual thoughts;
  Some variegated story, in the main
  Lofty, but the unsubstantial structure melts                       225
  Before the very sun that brightens it,
  Mist into air dissolving! Then a wish,
  My best and favourite aspiration, mounts
  With yearning toward some philosophic song
  Of Truth that cherishes our daily life;                            230
  With meditations passionate from deep
  Recesses in man's heart, immortal verse [T]
  Thoughtfully fitted to the Orphean lyre; [U]
  But from this awful burthen I full soon
  Take refuge and beguile myself with trust                          235
  That mellower years will bring a riper mind
  And clearer insight. Thus my days are past
  In contradiction; with no skill to part
  Vague longing, haply bred by want of power,
  From paramount impulse not to be withstood,                        240
  A timorous capacity from prudence,
  From circumspection, infinite delay.
  Humility and modest awe themselves
  Betray me, serving often for a cloak
  To a more subtle selfishness; that now                             245
  Locks every function up in blank reserve,
  Now dupes me, trusting to an anxious eye
  That with intrusive restlessness beats off
  Simplicity and self-presented truth.
  Ah! better far than this, to stray about                           250
  Voluptuously through fields and rural walks,
  And ask no record of the hours, resigned
  To vacant musing, unreproved neglect
  Of all things, and deliberate holiday.
  Far better never to have heard the name                            255
  Of zeal and just ambition, than to live
  Baffled and plagued by a mind that every hour
  Turns recreant to her task; takes heart again,
  Then feels immediately some hollow thought
  Hang like an interdict upon her hopes.                             260
  This is my lot; for either still I find
  Some imperfection in the chosen theme,
  Or see of absolute accomplishment
  Much wanting, so much wanting, in myself,
  That I recoil and droop, and seek repose                           265
  In listlessness from vain perplexity,
  Unprofitably travelling toward the grave,
  Like a false steward who hath much received
  And renders nothing back.
                             Was it for this
  That one, the fairest of all rivers, [V] loved                     270
  To blend his murmurs with my nurse's song,
  And, from his alder shades and rocky falls,
  And from his fords and shallows, sent a voice
  That flowed along my dreams? For this, didst thou,
  O Derwent! winding among grassy holms                              275
  Where I was looking on, a babe in arms,
  Make ceaseless music that composed my thoughts
  To more than infant softness, giving me
  Amid the fretful dwellings of mankind
  A foretaste, a dim earnest, of the calm                            280
  That Nature breathes among the hills and groves?
  When he had left the mountains and received
  On his smooth breast the shadow of those towers [W]
  That yet survive, a shattered monument
  Of feudal sway, the bright blue river passed                       285
  Along the margin of our terrace walk; [X]
  A tempting playmate whom we dearly loved.
  Oh, many a time have I, a five years' child,
  In a small mill-race severed from his stream,
  Made one long bathing of a summer's day;                           290
  Basked in the sun, and plunged and basked again
  Alternate, all a summer's day, or scoured
  The sandy fields, leaping through flowery groves
  Of yellow ragwort; or when rock and hill,
  The woods, and distant Skiddaw's lofty height,                     295
  Were bronzed with deepest radiance, stood alone
  Beneath the sky, as if I had been born
  On Indian plains, and from my mother's hut
  Had run abroad in wantonness, to sport
  A naked savage, in the thunder shower.                             300

    Fair seed-time had my soul, and I grew up
  Fostered alike by beauty and by fear:
  Much favoured in my birth-place, and no less
  In that beloved Vale to which erelong
  We were transplanted [Y]--there were we let loose                  305
  For sports of wider range. Ere I had told
  Ten birth-days, [Z] when among the mountain slopes
  Frost, and the breath of frosty wind, had snapped
  The last autumnal crocus, [a] 'twas my joy
  With store of springes o'er my shoulder hung                       310
  To range the open heights where woodcocks run
  Along the smooth green turf. [b] Through half the night,
  Scudding away from snare to snare, I plied
  That anxious visitation;--moon and stars
  Were shining o'er my head. I was alone,                            315
  And seemed to be a trouble to the peace
  That dwelt among them. Sometimes it befel
  In these night wanderings, that a strong desire
  O'erpowered my better reason, and the bird
  Which was the captive of another's toil                            320
  Became my prey; and when the deed was done
  I heard among the solitary hills
  Low breathings coming after me, and sounds
  Of undistinguishable motion, steps
  Almost as silent as the turf they trod.                            325

  Nor less when spring had warmed the cultured Vale, [c]
  Moved we as plunderers where the mother-bird
  Had in high places built her lodge; though mean
  Our object and inglorious, yet the end
  Was not ignoble. Oh! when I have hung                              330
  Above the raven's nest, by knots of grass
  And half-inch fissures in the slippery rock
  But ill sustained, and almost (so it seemed)
  Suspended by the blast that blew amain,
  Shouldering the naked crag, [d] oh, at that time                    335
  While on the perilous ridge I hung alone,
  With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind
  Blow through my ear! the sky seemed not a sky
  Of earth--and with what motion moved the clouds!

    Dust as we are, the immortal spirit grows                         340
  Like harmony in music; there is a dark
  Inscrutable workmanship that reconciles
  Discordant elements, makes them cling together
  In one society. How strange that all
  The terrors, pains, and early miseries,                             345
  Regrets, vexations, lassitudes interfused
  Within my mind, should e'er have borne a part,
  And that a needful part, in making up
  The calm existence that is mine when I
  Am worthy of myself! Praise to the end!                             350
  Thanks to the means which Nature deigned to employ;
  Whether her fearless visitings, or those
  That came with soft alarm, like hurtless light
  Opening the peaceful clouds; or she may use
  Severer interventions, ministry                                     355
  More palpable, as best might suit her aim.

    One summer evening (led by her) I found
  A little boat tied to a willow tree
  Within a rocky cave, [e] its usual home.
  Straight I unloosed her chain, and stepping in                      360
  Pushed from the shore. It was an act of stealth
  And troubled pleasure, nor without the voice
  Of mountain-echoes did my boat move on;
  Leaving behind her still, on either side,
  Small circles glittering idly in the moon,                          365
  Until they melted all into one track
  Of sparkling light. But now, like one who rows,
  Proud of his skill, to reach a chosen point
  With an unswerving line, I fixed my view
  Upon the summit of a craggy ridge,                                  370
  The horizon's utmost boundary; far above
  Was nothing but the stars and the grey sky.
  She was an elfin pinnace; lustily
  I dipped my oars into the silent lake,
  And, as I rose upon the stroke, my boat                             375
  Went heaving through the water like a swan;
  When, from behind that craggy steep till then
  The horizon's bound, a huge peak, black and huge,
  As if with voluntary power instinct
  Upreared its head. [f] I struck and struck again,                   380
  And growing still in stature the grim shape
  Towered up between me and the stars, and still,
  For so it seemed, with purpose of its own
  And measured motion like a living thing,
  Strode after me. With trembling oars I turned,                      385
  And through the silent water stole my way
  Back to the covert of the willow tree;
  There in her mooring-place I left my bark,--
  And through the meadows homeward went, in grave
  And serious mood; but after I had seen                              390
  That spectacle, for many days, my brain
  Worked with a dim and undetermined sense
  Of unknown modes of being; o'er my thoughts
  There hung a darkness, call it solitude
  Or blank desertion. No familiar shapes                              395
  Remained, no pleasant images of trees,
  Of sea or sky, no colours of green fields;
  But huge and mighty forms, that do not live
  Like living men, moved slowly through the mind
  By day, and were a trouble to my dreams.                            400

    Wisdom and Spirit of the universe!
  Thou Soul that art the eternity of thought,
  That givest to forms and images a breath
  And everlasting motion, not in vain
  By day or star-light thus from my first dawn                        405
  Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me
  The passions that build up our human soul;
  Not with the mean and vulgar works of man,
  But with high objects, with enduring things--
  With life and nature, purifying thus                                410
  The elements of feeling and of thought,
  And sanctifying, by such discipline,
  Both pain and fear, until we recognise
  A grandeur in the beatings of the heart.
  Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me                            415
  With stinted kindness. In November days,
  When vapours rolling down the valley made
  A lonely scene more lonesome, among woods
  At noon, and 'mid the calm of summer nights,
  When, by the margin of the trembling lake,                          420
  Beneath the gloomy hills homeward I went
  In solitude, such intercourse was mine;
  Mine was it in the fields both day and night,
  And by the waters, all the summer long.

    And in the frosty season, when the sun                            425
  Was set, and visible for many a mile
  The cottage windows blazed through twilight gloom,
  I heeded not their summons: happy time
  It was indeed for all of us--for me
  It was a time of rapture! Clear and loud                            430
  The village clock tolled six,--I wheeled about,
  Proud and exulting like an untired horse
  That cares not for his home. All shod with steel,
  We hissed along the polished ice in games
  Confederate, imitative of the chase                                 435
  And woodland pleasures,--the resounding horn,
  The pack loud chiming, and the hunted hare.
  So through the darkness and the cold we flew,
  And not a voice was idle; with the din
  Smitten, the precipices rang aloud;                                 440
  The leafless trees and every icy crag
  Tinkled like iron; [g] while far distant hills
  Into the tumult sent an alien sound
  Of melancholy not unnoticed, while the stars
  Eastward were sparkling clear, and in the west                      445
  The orange sky of evening died away.
  Not seldom from the uproar I retired
  Into a silent bay, or sportively
  Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng,
  To cut across the reflex of a star                                  450
  That fled, and, flying still before me, gleamed
  Upon the glassy plain; and oftentimes,
  When we had given our bodies to the wind,
  And all the shadowy banks on either side
  Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still                  455
  The rapid line of motion, then at once
  Have I, reclining back upon my heels,
  Stopped short; yet still the solitary cliffs
  Wheeled by me--even as if the earth had rolled
  With visible motion her diurnal round!                              460
  Behind me did they stretch in solemn train,
  Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched
  Till all was tranquil as a dreamless sleep. [h]

    Ye Presences of Nature in the sky
  And on the earth! Ye Visions of the hills!                          465
  And Souls of lonely places! can I think
  A vulgar hope was yours when ye employed
  Such ministry, when ye through many a year
  Haunting me thus among my boyish sports,
  On caves and trees, upon the woods and hills,                       470
  Impressed upon all forms the characters
  Of danger or desire; and thus did make
  The surface of the universal earth
  With triumph and delight, with hope and fear,
  Work like a sea?
    Not uselessly employed,                                           475
  Might I pursue this theme through every change
  Of exercise and play, to which the year
  Did summon us in his delightful round.

    We were a noisy crew; the sun in heaven
  Beheld not vales more beautiful than ours;                          480
  Nor saw a band in happiness and joy
  Richer, or worthier of the ground they trod.
  I could record with no reluctant voice
  The woods of autumn, and their hazel bowers
  With milk-white clusters hung; the rod and line,                    485
  True symbol of hope's foolishness, whose strong
  And unreproved enchantment led us on
  By rocks and pools shut out from every star,
  All the green summer, to forlorn cascades
  Among the windings hid of mountain brooks. [i]                      490
  --Unfading recollections! at this hour
  The heart is almost mine with which I felt,
  From some hill-top on sunny afternoons, [j]
  The paper kite high among fleecy clouds
  Pull at her rein like an impetuous courser;                         495
  Or, from the meadows sent on gusty days,
  Beheld her breast the wind, then suddenly
  Dashed headlong, and rejected by the storm.

    Ye lowly cottages wherein we dwelt,
  A ministration of your own was yours;                               500
  Can I forget you, being as you were
  So beautiful among the pleasant fields
  In which ye stood? or can I here forget
  The plain and seemly countenance with which
  Ye dealt out your plain comforts? Yet had ye                        505
  Delights and exultations of your own. [k]
  Eager and never weary we pursued
  Our home-amusements by the warm peat-fire
  At evening, when with pencil, and smooth slate
  In square divisions parcelled out and all                           510
  With crosses and with cyphers scribbled o'er,
  We schemed and puzzled, head opposed to head
  In strife too humble to be named in verse:
  Or round the naked table, snow-white deal,
  Cherry or maple, sate in close array,                               515
  And to the combat, Loo or Whist, led on
  A thick-ribbed army; not, as in the world,
  Neglected and ungratefully thrown by
  Even for the very service they had wrought,
  But husbanded through many a long campaign.                         520
  Uncouth assemblage was it, where no few
  Had changed their functions; some, plebeian cards [l]
  Which Fate, beyond the promise of their birth, [m]
  Had dignified, and called to represent
  The persons of departed potentates.                                 525
  Oh, with what echoes on the board they fell!
  Ironic diamonds,--clubs, hearts, diamonds, spades,
  A congregation piteously akin!
  Cheap matter offered they to boyish wit,
  Those sooty knaves, precipitated down                               530
  With scoffs and taunts, like Vulcan out of heaven:
  The paramount ace, a moon in her eclipse,
  Queens gleaming through their splendour's last decay,
  And monarchs surly at the wrongs sustained
  By royal visages. Meanwhile abroad                                  535
  Incessant rain was falling, or the frost
  Raged bitterly, with keen and silent tooth;
  And, interrupting oft that eager game,
  From under Esthwaite's splitting fields of ice
  The pent-up air, struggling to free itself,                         540
  Gave out to meadow grounds and hills a loud
  Protracted yelling, like the noise of wolves
  Howling in troops along the Bothnic Main. [n]

    Nor, sedulous as I have been to trace
  How Nature by extrinsic passion first                               545
  Peopled the mind with forms sublime or fair,
  And made me love them, may I here omit
  How other pleasures have been mine, and joys
  Of subtler origin; how I have felt,
  Not seldom even in that tempestuous time,                           550
  Those hallowed and pure motions of the sense
  Which seem, in their simplicity, to own
  An intellectual charm; that calm delight
  Which, if I err not, surely must belong
  To those first-born affinities that fit                             555
  Our new existence to existing things,
  And, in our dawn of being, constitute
  The bond of union between life and joy.

    Yes, I remember when the changeful earth,
  And twice five summers on my mind had stamped                       560
  The faces of the moving year, even then
  I held unconscious intercourse with beauty
  Old as creation, drinking in a pure
  Organic pleasure from the silver wreaths
  Of curling mist, or from the level plain                            565
  Of waters coloured by impending clouds. [o]

    The sands of Westmoreland, the creeks and bays
  Of Cumbria's rocky limits, they can tell
  How, when the Sea threw off his evening shade,
  And to the shepherd's hut on distant hills                          570
  Sent welcome notice of the rising moon,
  How I have stood, to fancies such as these
  A stranger, linking with the spectacle
  No conscious memory of a kindred sight,
  And bringing with me no peculiar sense                              575
  Of quietness or peace; yet have I stood,
  Even while mine eye hath moved o'er many a league
  Of shining water, gathering as it seemed
  Through every hair-breadth in that field of light
  New pleasure like a bee among the flowers.                          580

    Thus oft amid those fits of vulgar joy
  Which, through all seasons, on a child's pursuits
  Are prompt attendants, 'mid that giddy bliss
  Which, like a tempest, works along the blood
  And is forgotten; even then I felt                                  585
  Gleams like the flashing of a shield;--the earth
  And common face of Nature spake to me
  Rememberable things; sometimes, 'tis true,
  By chance collisions and quaint accidents
  (Like those ill-sorted unions, work supposed                        590
  Of evil-minded fairies), yet not vain
  Nor profitless, if haply they impressed
  Collateral objects and appearances,
  Albeit lifeless then, and doomed to sleep
  Until maturer seasons called them forth                             595
  To impregnate and to elevate the mind.
--And if the vulgar joy by its own weight
  Wearied itself out of the memory,
  The scenes which were a witness of that joy
  Remained in their substantial lineaments                            600
  Depicted on the brain, and to the eye
  Were visible, a daily sight; and thus
  By the impressive discipline of fear,
  By pleasure and repeated happiness,
  So frequently repeated, and by force                                605
  Of obscure feelings representative
  Of things forgotten, these same scenes so bright,
  So beautiful, so majestic in themselves,
  Though yet the day was distant, did become
  Habitually dear, and all their forms                                610
  And changeful colours by invisible links
  Were fastened to the affections.

                                   I began
  My story early--not misled, I trust,
  By an infirmity of love for days
  Disowned by memory--ere the breath of spring                        615
  Planting my snowdrops among winter snows: [p]
  Nor will it seem to thee, O Friend! so prompt
  In sympathy, that I have lengthened out
  With fond and feeble tongue a tedious tale.
  Meanwhile, my hope has been, that I might fetch                     620
  Invigorating thoughts from former years;
  Might fix the wavering balance of my mind,
  And haply meet reproaches too, whose power
  May spur me on, in manhood now mature
  To honourable toil. Yet should these hopes                          625
  Prove vain, and thus should neither I be taught
  To understand myself, nor thou to know
  With better knowledge how the heart was framed
  Of him thou lovest; need I dread from thee
  Harsh judgments, if the song be loth to quit                        630
  Those recollected hours that have the charm
  Of visionary things, those lovely forms
  And sweet sensations that throw back our life,
  And almost make remotest infancy
  A visible scene, on which the sun is shining? [q]                   635

    One end at least hath been attained; my mind
  Hath been revived, and if this genial mood
  Desert me not, forthwith shall be brought down
  Through later years the story of my life.
  The road lies plain before me;--'tis a theme                        640
  Single and of determined bounds; and hence
  I choose it rather at this time, than work
  Of ampler or more varied argument,
  Where I might be discomfited and lost:
  And certain hopes are with me, that to thee                         645
  This labour will be welcome, honoured Friend!


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES TO BOOK THE FIRST

[Footnote A: On the authority of the poet's nephew, and others, the
"city" here referred to has invariably been supposed to be Goslar, where
he spent the winter of 1799. Goslar, however, is as unlike a "vast city"
as it is possible to conceive. Wordsworth could have walked from end to
end of it in ten minutes.

One would think he was rather referring to London, but there is no
evidence to show that he visited the metropolis in the spring of 1799.
The lines which follow about "the open fields" (l. 50) are certainly
more appropriate to a journey from London to Sockburn, than from Goslar
to Gottingen; and what follows, the "green shady place" of l. 62, the
"known Vale" and the "cottage" of ll. 72 and 74, certainly refer to
English soil.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare 'Paradise Lost', xii. l. 646.

  'The world was all before them, where to choose.'

Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare 'Lines composed above Tintern Abbey', II. 52-5
(vol. ii. p. 53.)--Ed.]


[Footnote D: S. T. Coleridge.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: At Sockburn-on-Tees, county Durham, seven miles south-east
of Darlington.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Grasmere.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: Dove Cottage at Town-end.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: This quotation I am unable to trace.--Ed.]

[Footnote I: Wordsworth spent most of the year 1799 (from March to
December) at Sockburn with the Hutchinsons. With Coleridge and his
brother John he went to Windermere, Rydal, Grasmere, etc., in the
autumn, returning afterwards to Sockburn. He left it again, with his
sister, on Dec. 19, to settle at Grasmere, and they reached Dove Cottage
on Dec. 21, 1799.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: See Dorothy Wordsworth's Grasmere Journal, _passim._--Ed.]


[Footnote L: Compare the 2nd and 3rd of the 'Stanzas written in my
pocket-copy of Thomson's Castle of Indolence', vol. ii. p. 306, and the
note appended to that poem.--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Mithridates (the Great) of Pontus, 131 B.C. to 63 B.C.
Vanquished by Pompey, B.C. 65, he fled to his son-in-law, Tigranes, in
Armenia. Being refused an asylum, he committed suicide. I cannot trace
the legend of Mithridates becoming Odin. Probably Wordsworth means that
he would invent, rather than "relate," the story. Gibbon ('Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire', chap. x.) says,

  "It is supposed that Odin was the chief of a tribe of barbarians, who
  dwelt on the banks of Lake Maeotis, till the fall of Mithridates, and
  the arms of Pompey menaced the north with servitude; that Odin,
  yielding with indignant fury to a power which he was unable to resist,
  conducted his tribe from the frontiers of Asiatic Sarmatia into
  Sweden."

See also Mallet, 'Northern Antiquities', and Crichton and Wheaton's
'Scandinavia' (Edinburgh Cabinet Library):

  "Among the fugitive princes of Scythia, who were expelled from their
  country in the Mithridatic war, tradition has placed the name of Odin,
  the ruler of a potent tribe in Turkestan, between the Euxine and the
  Caspian."

Ed.]


[Footnote N: Sertorius, one of the Roman generals of the later
Republican era (see Plutarch's biography of him, and Corneille's
tragedy). On being proscribed by Sylla, he fled from Etruria to Spain;
there he became the leader of several bands of exiles, and repulsed the
Roman armies sent against him. Mithridates VI.--referred to in the
previous note--aided him, both with ships and money, being desirous of
establishing a new Roman Republic in Spain. From Spain he went to
Mauritania. In the Straits of Gibraltar he met some sailors, who had
been in the Atlantic Isles, and whose reports made him wish to visit
these islands.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: Supposed to be the Canaries.--Ed.]


[Footnote P:

  "In the early part of the fifteenth century there arrived at Lisbon an
  old bewildered pilot of the seas, who had been driven by tempests he
  knew not whither, and raved about an island in the far deep upon which
  he had landed, and which he had found peopled, and adorned with noble
  cities. The inhabitants told him that they were descendants of a band
  of Christians who fled from Spain when that country was conquered by
  the Moslems."

(See Washington Irving's 'Chronicles of Wolfert's Roost', etc.; and
Baring Gould's 'Curious Myths of the Middle Ages'.)--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: Dominique de Gourgues, a French gentleman, who went in 1568
to Florida, to avenge the massacre of the French by the Spaniards there.
(Mr. Carter, in the edition of 1850.)--Ed.]


[Footnote R: Gustavus I. of Sweden. In the course of his war with
Denmark he retreated to Dalecarlia, where he was a miner and field
labourer.--Ed.]


[Footnote S: The name--both as Christian and surname--is common in
Scotland, and towns (such as Wallacetown, Ayr) are named after him.

  "Passed two of Wallace's caves. There is scarcely a noted glen in
  Scotland that has not a cave for Wallace, or some other hero."

Dorothy Wordsworth's 'Recollections of a Tour made in Scotland in 1803'
(Sunday, August 21).--Ed.]


[Footnote T: Compare 'L'Allegro', l. 137.--Ed.]


[Footnote U: Compare 'Paradise Lost', iii. 17.--Ed.]


[Footnote V: The Derwent, on which the town of Cockermouth is built,
where Wordsworth was born on the 7th of April 1770.--Ed.]


[Footnote W: The towers of Cockermouth Castle.--Ed.]


[Footnote X: The "terrace walk" is at the foot of the garden, attached
to the old mansion in which Wordsworth's father, law-agent of the Earl
of Lonsdale, resided. This home of his childhood is alluded to in 'The
Sparrow's Nest', vol. ii. p. 236. Three of the "Poems, composed or
suggested during a Tour, in the Summer of 1833," refer to Cockermouth.
They are the fifth, sixth, and seventh in that series of Sonnets: and
are entitled respectively 'To the River Derwent'; 'In sight of the Town
of Cockermouth'; and the 'Address from the Spirit of Cockermouth
Castle'. It was proposed some time ago that this house--which is known
in Cockermouth as "Wordsworth House,"--should be purchased, and since
the Grammar School of the place is out of repair, that it should be
converted into a School, in memory of Wordsworth. This excellent
suggestion has not yet been carried out--Ed.]


[Footnote Y: The Vale of Esthwaite.--Ed.]


[Footnote Z: He went to Hawkshead School in 1778.--Ed.]


[Footnote a: About mid October the autumn crocus in the garden "snaps"
in that district.--Ed.]


[Footnote b: Possibly in the Claife and Colthouse heights to the east of
Esthwaite Water; but more probably the round-headed grassy hills that
lead up and on to the moor between Hawkshead and Coniston, where the
turf is always green and smooth.--Ed.]


[Footnote c: Yewdale: see next note. "Cultured Vale" exactly describes
the little oat-growing valley of Yewdale.--Ed.]


[Footnote d: As there are no "naked crags" with "half-inch fissures in
the slippery rocks" in the "cultured vale" of Esthwaite, the locality
referred to is probably the Hohne Fells above Yewdale, to the north of
Coniston, and only a few miles from Hawkshead, where a crag, now named
Raven's Crag, divides Tilberthwaite from Yewdale. In his 'Epistle to Sir
George Beaumont', Wordsworth speaks of Yewdale as a plain

             'spread
  Under a rock too steep for man to tread,
  Where sheltered from the north and bleak north-west
  Aloft the Raven hangs a visible nest,
  Fearless of all assaults that would her brood molest.'

Ed.]


[Footnote e: Dr. Cradock suggested the reading "rocky cove." Rocky cave
is tautological, and Wordsworth would hardly apply the epithet to an
ordinary boat-house.--Ed.]


[Footnote f: The "craggy steep till then the horizon's bound," is
probably the ridge of Ironkeld, reaching from high Arnside to the Tom
Heights above Tarn Hows; while the "huge peak, black and huge, as if
with voluntary power instinct," may he either the summit of Wetherlam,
or of Pike o'Blisco.  Mr. Rawnsley, however, is of opinion that if
Wordsworth rowed off from the west bank of Fasthwaite, he might see
beyond the craggy ridge of Loughrigg the mass of Nab-Scar, and Rydal
Head would rise up "black and huge." If he rowed from the east side,
then Pike o'Stickle, or Harrison Stickle, might rise above Ironkeld,
over Borwick Ground.--Ed.]


[Footnote g: Compare S. T. Coleridge.

  "When very many are skating together, the sounds and the noises give
  an impulse to the icy trees, and the woods all round the lake
  _tinkle_."

'The Friend', vol. ii. p. 325 (edition 1818).--Ed.]


[Footnote h: The two preceding paragraphs were published in 'The
Friend', December 28, 1809, under the title of the 'Growth of Genius
from the Influences of Natural Objects on the Imagination, in Boyhood
and Early Youth', and were afterwards inserted in all the collective
editions of Wordsworth's poems, from 1815 onwards. For the changes of
the text in these editions, see vol. ii. pp. 66-69.--Ed.]


[Footnote i: The becks amongst the Furness Fells, in Yewdale, and
elsewhere.--Ed.]


[Footnote j:  Possibly from the top of some of the rounded moraine hills
on the western side of the Hawkshead Valley.--Ed.]


[Footnote k: The pupils in the Hawkshead school, in Wordsworth's time,
boarded in the houses of village dames. Wordsworth lived with one Anne
Tyson, for whom he ever afterwards cherished the warmest regard, and
whose simple character he has immortalised. (See especially in the
fourth book of 'The Prelude', p. 187, etc.) Wordsworth lived in her
cottage at Hawkshead during nine eventful years. It still remains
externally unaltered, and little, if at all, changed in the interior. It
may be reached through a picturesque archway, near the principal inn of
the village (The Lion); and is on the right of a small open yard, which
is entered through this archway. To the left, a lane leads westwards to
the open country. It is a humble dwelling of two storeys. The floor of
the basement flat-paved with the blue flags of Coniston slate--is not
likely to have been changed since Wordsworth's time. The present door
with its "latch" (see book ii. l. 339), is probably the same as that
referred to in the poem, as in use in 1776, and onwards. For further
details see notes to book iv.--Ed.]


[Footnote l: Compare Pope's 'Rape of the Lock', canto iii. l. 54:

  'Gained but one trump, and one plebeian card.'

Ed.]


[Footnote m: Compare Walton's 'Compleat Angler', part i. 4:

  'I was for that time lifted above earth,
  And possess'd joys not promised in my birth.'

Ed.]


[Footnote n: The notes to this edition are explanatory rather than
critical; but as this image has been objected to--as inaccurate, and out
of all analogy with Wordsworth's use and wont--it may be mentioned that
the noise of the breaking up of the ice, after a severe winter in these
lakes, when it cracks and splits in all directions, is exactly as here
described. It is not of course, in any sense peculiar to the English
lakes; but there are probably few districts where the peculiar noise
referred to can be heard so easily or frequently. Compare Coleridge's
account of the Lake of Ratzeburg in winter, in 'The Friend', vol. ii. p.
323 (edition of 1818), and his reference to "the thunders and 'howlings'
of the breaking ice."--Ed.]


[Footnote o: I here insert a very remarkable MS. variation of the text,
or rather (I think) one of these experiments in dealing with his theme,
which were common with Wordsworth. I found it in a copy of the Poems
belonging to the poet's son:

  I tread the mazes of this argument, and paint
  How nature by collateral interest
  And by extrinsic passion peopled first
  My mind with beauteous objects: may I well
  Forget what might demand a loftier song,
  For oft the Eternal Spirit, He that has
  His Life in unimaginable things,
  And he who painting what He is in all
  The visible imagery of all the World
  Is yet apparent chiefly as the Soul
  Of our first sympathies--O bounteous power
  In Childhood, in rememberable days
  How often did thy love renew for me
  Those naked feelings which, when thou would'st form
  A living thing, thou sendest like a breeze
  Into its infant being! Soul of things
  How often did thy love renew for me
  Those hallowed and pure motions of the sense
  Which seem in their simplicity to own
  An intellectual charm: That calm delight
  Which, if I err not, surely must belong
  To those first-born affinities which fit
  Our new existence to existing things,
  And, in our dawn of being, constitute
  The bond of union betwixt life and joy.
  Yes, I remember, when the changeful youth
  And twice five seasons on my mind had stamped
  The faces of the moving year, even then
  A child, I held unconscious intercourse
  With the eternal beauty, drinking in
  A pure organic pleasure from the lines
  Of curling mist, or from the smooth expanse
  Of waters coloured by the clouds of Heaven.

Ed.]


[Footnote p: Snowdrops still grow abundantly in many an orchard and
meadow by the road which skirts the western side of Esthwaite
Lake.--Ed.]


[Footnote q: Compare the 'Ode, Intimations of Immortality', stanza
ix.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK SECOND


SCHOOL-TIME--continued ...


  Thus far, O Friend! have we, though leaving much
  Unvisited, endeavoured to retrace
  The simple ways in which my childhood walked;
  Those chiefly that first led me to the love
  Of rivers, woods, and fields. The passion yet                        5
  Was in its birth, sustained as might befal
  By nourishment that came unsought; for still
  From week to week, from month to month, we lived
  A round of tumult. Duly were our games
  Prolonged in summer till the day-light failed:                      10
  No chair remained before the doors; the bench
  And threshold steps were empty; fast asleep
  The labourer, and the old man who had sate
  A later lingerer; yet the revelry
  Continued and the loud uproar: at last,                             15
  When all the ground was dark, and twinkling stars
  Edged the black clouds, home and to bed we went,
  Feverish with weary joints and beating minds.
  Ah! is there one who ever has been young,
  Nor needs a warning voice to tame the pride                         20
  Of intellect and virtue's self-esteem?
  One is there, though the wisest and the best
  Of all mankind, who covets not at times
  Union that cannot be;--who would not give,
  If so he might, to duty and to truth                                25
  The eagerness of infantine desire?
  A tranquillising spirit presses now
  On my corporeal frame, so wide appears
  The vacancy between me and those days
  Which yet have such self-presence in my mind,                       30
  That, musing on them, often do I seem
  Two consciousnesses, conscious of myself
  And of some other Being. A rude mass
  Of native rock, left midway in the square
  Of our small market village, was the goal                           35
  Or centre of these sports; [A] and when, returned
  After long absence, thither I repaired,
  Gone was the old grey stone, and in its place
  A smart Assembly-room usurped the ground
  That had been ours. There let the fiddle scream,                    40
  And be ye happy! Yet, my Friends! I know
  That more than one of you will think with me
  Of those soft starry nights, and that old Dame
  From whom the stone was named, who there had sate,
  And watched her table with its huckster's wares                     45
  Assiduous, through the length of sixty years.

    We ran a boisterous course; the year span round
  With giddy motion. But the time approached
  That brought with it a regular desire
  For calmer pleasures, when the winning forms                        50
  Of Nature were collaterally attached
  To every scheme of holiday delight
  And every boyish sport, less grateful else
  And languidly pursued.
                         When summer came,
  Our pastime was, on bright half-holidays,                           55
  To sweep, along the plain of Windermere
  With rival oars; [B] and the selected bourne
  Was now an Island musical with birds
  That sang and ceased not; now a Sister Isle
  Beneath the oaks' umbrageous covert, sown                           60
  With lilies of the valley like a field; [C]
  And now a third small Island, where survived
  In solitude the ruins of a shrine
  Once to Our Lady dedicate, and served
  Daily with chaunted rites. [D] In such a race                       65
  So ended, disappointment could be none,
  Uneasiness, or pain, or jealousy:
  We rested in the shade, all pleased alike,
  Conquered and conqueror. Thus the pride of strength,
  And the vain-glory of superior skill,                               70
  Were tempered; thus was gradually produced
  A quiet independence of the heart;
  And to my Friend who knows me I may add,
  Fearless of blame, that hence for future days
  Ensued a diffidence and modesty,                                    75
  And I was taught to feel, perhaps too much,
  The self-sufficing power of Solitude.

    Our daily meals were frugal, Sabine fare!
  More than we wished we knew the blessing then
  Of vigorous hunger--hence corporeal strength                        80
  Unsapped by delicate viands; for, exclude
  A little weekly stipend, and we lived
  Through three divisions of the quartered year
  In penniless poverty. But now to school
  From the half-yearly holidays returned,                             85
  We came with weightier purses, that sufficed
  To furnish treats more costly than the Dame
  Of the old grey stone, from her scant board, supplied.
  Hence rustic dinners on the cool green ground,
  Or in the woods, or by a river side                                 90
  Or shady fountains, while among the leaves
  Soft airs were stirring, and the mid-day sun
  Unfelt shone brightly round us in our joy.
  Nor is my aim neglected if I tell
  How sometimes, in the length of those half-years,                   95
  We from our funds drew largely;--proud to curb,
  And eager to spur on, the galloping steed;
  And with the courteous inn-keeper, whose stud
  Supplied our want, we haply might employ
  Sly subterfuge, if the adventure's bound                           100
  Were distant: some famed temple where of yore
  The Druids worshipped, [E] or the antique walls
  Of that large abbey, where within the Vale
  Of Nightshade, to St. Mary's honour built, [F]
  Stands yet a mouldering pile with fractured arch,                  105
  Belfry, [G] and images, and living trees,
  A holy scene! Along the smooth green turf
  Our horses grazed. To more than inland peace
  Left by the west wind sweeping overhead
  From a tumultuous ocean, trees and towers                          110
  In that sequestered valley may be seen,
  Both silent and both motionless alike;
  Such the deep shelter that is there, and such
  The safeguard for repose and quietness.

    Our steeds remounted and the summons given,                      115
  With whip and spur we through the chauntry flew
  In uncouth race, and left the cross-legged knight,
  And the stone-abbot, [H] and that single wren
  Which one day sang so sweetly in the nave
  Of the old church, that--though from recent showers                120
  The earth was comfortless, and touched by faint
  Internal breezes, sobbings of the place
  And respirations, from the roofless walls
  The shuddering ivy dripped large drops--yet still
  So sweetly 'mid the gloom the invisible bird                       125
  Sang to herself, that there I could have made
  My dwelling-place, and lived for ever there
  To hear such music. Through the walls we flew
  And down the valley, and, a circuit made
  In wantonness of heart, through rough and smooth                   130
  We scampered homewards. Oh, ye rocks and streams,
  And that still spirit shed from evening air!
  Even in this joyous time I sometimes felt
  Your presence, when with slackened step we breathed
  Along the sides of the steep hills, or when                        135
  Lighted by gleams of moonlight from the sea
  We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand.

    Midway on long Winander's eastern shore,
  Within the crescent of a pleasant bay, [I]
  A tavern stood; [K] no homely-featured house,                      140
  Primeval like its neighbouring cottages,
  But 'twas a splendid place, the door beset
  With chaises, grooms, and liveries, and within
  Decanters, glasses, and the blood-red wine.
  In ancient times, and ere the Hall was built                       145
  On the large island, had this dwelling been
  More worthy of a poet's love, a hut,
  Proud of its own bright fire and sycamore shade.
  But--though the rhymes were gone that once inscribed
  The threshold, and large golden characters,                        150
  Spread o'er the spangled sign-board, had dislodged
  The old Lion and usurped his place, in slight
  And mockery of the rustic painter's hand--[L]
  Yet, to this hour, the spot to me is dear
  With all its foolish pomp. The garden lay                          155
  Upon a slope surmounted by a plain
  Of a small bowling-green; beneath us stood
  A grove, with gleams of water through the trees
  And over the tree-tops; [M] nor did we want
  Refreshment, strawberries and mellow cream.                        160
  There, while through half an afternoon we played
  On the smooth platform, whether skill prevailed
  Or happy blunder triumphed, bursts of glee
  Made all the mountains ring. But, ere night-fall,
  When in our pinnace we returned at leisure                         165
  Over the shadowy lake, and to the beach
  Of some small island steered our course with one,
  The Minstrel of the Troop, and left him there, [N]
  And rowed off gently, while he blew his flute
  Alone upon the rock--oh, then, the calm                            170
  And dead still water lay upon my mind
  Even with a weight of pleasure, and the sky,
  Never before so beautiful, sank down
  Into my heart, and held me like a dream!
  Thus were my sympathies enlarged, and thus                         175
  Daily the common range of visible things
  Grew dear to me: already I began
  To love the sun; a boy I loved the sun,
  Not as I since have loved him, as a pledge
  And surety of our earthly life, a light                            180
  Which we behold and feel we are alive; [O]
  Nor for his bounty to so many worlds--
  But for this cause, that I had seen him lay
  His beauty on the morning hills, had seen
  The western mountain [P] touch his setting orb,                    185
  In many a thoughtless hour, when, from excess
  Of happiness, my blood appeared to flow
  For its own pleasure, and I breathed with joy.
  And, from like feelings, humble though intense,
  To patriotic and domestic love                                     190
  Analogous, the moon to me was dear;
  For I could dream away my purposes,
  Standing to gaze upon her while she hung
  Midway between the hills, as if she knew
  No other region, but belonged to thee, [Q]                         195
  Yea, appertained by a peculiar right
  To thee and thy grey huts, thou one dear Vale! [R]

    Those incidental charms which first attached
  My heart to rural objects, day by day
  Grew weaker, and I hasten on to tell                               200
  How Nature, intervenient till this time
  And secondary, now at length was sought
  For her own sake. But who shall parcel out
  His intellect by geometric rules,
  Split like a province into round and square?                       205
  Who knows the individual hour in which
  His habits were first sown, even as a seed?
  Who that shall point as with a wand and say
  "This portion of the river of my mind
  Came from yon fountain?" [S] Thou, my Friend! art one              210
  More deeply read in thy own thoughts; to thee
  Science appears but what in truth she is,
  Not as our glory and our absolute boast,
  But as a succedaneum, and a prop
  To our infirmity. No officious slave                               215
  Art thou of that false secondary power
  By which we multiply distinctions; then,
  Deem that our puny boundaries are things
  That we perceive, and not that we have made.
  To thee, unblinded by these formal arts,                           220
  The unity of all hath been revealed,
  And thou wilt doubt, with me less aptly skilled
  Than many are to range the faculties
  In scale and order, class the cabinet
  Of their sensations, and in voluble phrase                         225
  Run through the history and birth of each
  As of a single independent thing.
  Hard task, vain hope, to analyse the mind,
  If each most obvious and particular thought,
  Not in a mystical and idle sense,                                  230
  But in the words of Reason deeply weighed,
  Hath no beginning.
                      Blest the infant Babe,
  (For with my best conjecture I would trace
  Our Being's earthly progress,) blest the Babe,
  Nursed in his Mother's arms, who sinks to sleep                    235
  Rocked on his Mother's breast; who with his soul
  Drinks in the feelings of his Mother's eye!
  For him, in one dear Presence, there exists
  A virtue which irradiates and exalts
  Objects through widest intercourse of sense.                       240
  No outcast he, bewildered and depressed:
  Along his infant veins are interfused
  The gravitation and the filial bond
  Of nature that connect him with the world.
  Is there a flower, to which he points with hand                    245
  Too weak to gather it, already love
  Drawn from love's purest earthly fount for him
  Hath beautified that flower; already shades
  Of pity cast from inward tenderness
  Do fall around him upon aught that bears                           250
  Unsightly marks of violence or harm.
  Emphatically such a Being lives,
  Frail creature as he is, helpless as frail,
  An inmate of this active universe.
  For feeling has to him imparted power                              255
  That through the growing faculties of sense
  Doth like an agent of the one great Mind
  Create, creator and receiver both,
  Working but in alliance with the works
  Which it beholds. Such, verily, is the first                       260
  Poetic spirit of our human life,
  By uniform control of after years,
  In most, abated or suppressed; in some,
  Through every change of growth and of decay,
  Pre-eminent till death.

                         From early days,                            265
  Beginning not long after that first time
  In which, a Babe, by intercourse of touch
  I held mute dialogues with my Mother's heart,
  I have endeavoured to display the means
  Whereby this infant sensibility,                                   270
  Great birthright of our being, was in me
  Augmented and sustained. Yet is a path
  More difficult before me; and I fear
  That in its broken windings we shall need
  The chamois' sinews, and the eagle's wing:                         275
  For now a trouble came into my mind
  From unknown causes. I was left alone
  Seeking the visible world, nor knowing why.
  The props of my affections were removed,
  And yet the building stood, as if sustained                        280
  By its own spirit! All that I beheld
  Was dear, and hence to finer influxes
  The mind lay open to a more exact
  And close communion. Many are our joys
  In youth, but oh! what happiness to live                           285
  When every hour brings palpable access
  Of knowledge, when all knowledge is delight,
  And sorrow is not there! The seasons came,
  And every season wheresoe'er I moved
  Unfolded transitory qualities,                                     290
  Which, but for this most watchful power of love,
  Had been neglected; left a register
  Of permanent relations, else unknown.
  Hence life, and change, and beauty, solitude
  More active even than "best society"--[T]                          295
  Society made sweet as solitude
  By silent inobtrusive sympathies--
  And gentle agitations of the mind
  From manifold distinctions, difference
  Perceived in things, where, to the unwatchful eye,                 300
  No difference is, and hence, from the same source,
  Sublimer joy; for I would walk alone,
  Under the quiet stars, and at that time
  Have felt whate'er there is of power in sound
  To breathe an elevated mood, by form                               305
  Or image unprofaned; and I would stand,
  If the night blackened with a coming storm,
  Beneath some rock, listening to notes that are
  The ghostly language of the ancient earth,
  Or make their dim abode in distant winds.                          310
  Thence did I drink the visionary power;
  And deem not profitless those fleeting moods
  Of shadowy exultation: not for this,
  That they are kindred to our purer mind
  And intellectual life; but that the soul,                          315
  Remembering how she felt, but what she felt
  Remembering not, retains an obscure sense
  Of possible sublimity, whereto
  With growing faculties she doth aspire,
  With faculties still growing, feeling still                        320
  That whatsoever point they gain, they yet
  Have something to pursue.

                                  And not alone,
  'Mid gloom and tumult, but no less 'mid fair
  And tranquil scenes, that universal power
  And fitness in the latent qualities                                325
  And essences of things, by which the mind
  Is moved with feelings of delight, to me
  Came, strengthened with a superadded soul,
  A virtue not its own. My morning walks
  Were early;--oft before the hours of school [U]                    330
  I travelled round our little lake, [V] five miles
  Of pleasant wandering. Happy time! more dear
  For this, that one was by my side, a Friend, [W]
  Then passionately loved; with heart how full
  Would he peruse these lines! For many years                        335
  Have since flowed in between us, and, our minds
  Both silent to each other, at this time
  We live as if those hours had never been.
  Nor seldom did I lift--our cottage latch [X]
  Far earlier, ere one smoke-wreath had risen                        340
  From human dwelling, or the vernal thrush
  Was audible; and sate among the woods
  Alone upon some jutting eminence, [Y]
  At the first gleam of dawn-light, when the Vale,
  Yet slumbering, lay in utter solitude.                             345
  How shall I seek the origin? where find
  Faith in the marvellous things which then I felt?
  Oft in these moments such a holy calm
  Would overspread my soul, that bodily eyes
  Were utterly forgotten, and what I saw                             350
  Appeared like something in myself, a dream,
  A prospect in the mind. [Z]
                    'Twere long to tell
  What spring and autumn, what the winter snows,
  And what the summer shade, what day and night,
  Evening and morning, sleep and waking, thought                     355
  From sources inexhaustible, poured forth
  To feed the spirit of religious love
  In which I walked with Nature. But let this
  Be not forgotten, that I still retained
  My first creative sensibility;                                     360
  That by the regular action of the world
  My soul was unsubdued. A plastic power
  Abode with me; a forming hand, at times
  Rebellious, acting in a devious mood;
  A local spirit of his own, at war                                  365
  With general tendency, but, for the most,
  Subservient strictly to external things
  With which it communed. An auxiliar light
  Came from my mind, which on the setting sun
  Bestowed new splendour; the melodious birds,                       370
  The fluttering breezes, fountains that run on
  Murmuring so sweetly in themselves, obeyed
  A like dominion, and the midnight storm
  Grew darker in the presence of my eye:
  Hence my obeisance, my devotion hence,                             375
  And hence my transport.
           Nor should this, perchance,
  Pass unrecorded, that I still had loved
  The exercise and produce of a toil,
  Than analytic industry to me
  More pleasing, and whose character I deem                          380
  Is more poetic as resembling more
  Creative agency. The song would speak
  Of that interminable building reared
  By observation of affinities
  In objects where no brotherhood exists                             385
  To passive minds. My seventeenth year was come;
  And, whether from this habit rooted now
  So deeply in my mind; or from excess
  In the great social principle of life
  Coercing all things into sympathy,                                 390
  To unorganic ratures were transferred
  My own enjoyments; or the power of truth
  Coming in revelation, did converse
  With things that really are; I, at this time,
  Saw blessings spread around me like a sea.                         395
  Thus while the days flew by, and years passed on,
  From Nature and her overflowing soul,
  I had received so much, that all my thoughts
  Were steeped in feeling; I was only then
  Contented, when with bliss ineffable                               400
  I felt the sentiment of Being spread
  O'er all that moves and all that seemeth still;
  O'er all that, lost beyond the reach of thought
  And human knowledge, to the human eye
  Invisible, yet liveth to the heart;                                405
  O'er all that leaps and runs, and shouts and sings,
  Or beats the gladsome air; o'er all that glides
  Beneath the wave, yea, in the wave itself,
  And mighty depth of waters. Wonder not
  If high the transport, great the joy I felt,                       410
  Communing in this sort through earth and heaven
  With every form of creature, as it looked
  Towards the Uncreated with a countenance
  Of adoration, with an eye of love.
  One song they sang, and it was audible,                            415
  Most audible, then, when the fleshly ear,
  O'ercome by humblest prelude of that strain,
  Forgot her functions, and slept undisturbed.

    If this be error, and another faith
  Find easier access to the pious mind,                              420
  Yet were I grossly destitute of all
  Those human sentiments that make this earth
  So dear, if I should fail with grateful voice
  To speak of you, ye mountains, and ye lakes
  And sounding cataracts, ye mists and winds                         425
  That dwell among the hills where I was born.
  If in my youth I have been pure in heart,
  If, mingling with the world, I am content
  With my own modest pleasures, and have lived
  With God and Nature communing, removed                             430
  From little enmities and low desires,
  The gift is yours; if in these times of fear,
  This melancholy waste of hopes o'erthrown,
  If, 'mid indifference and apathy,
  And wicked exultation when good men                                435
  On every side fall off, we know not how,
  To selfishness, disguised in gentle names
  Of peace and quiet and domestic love,
  Yet mingled not unwillingly with sneers
  On visionary minds; if, in this time                               440
  Of dereliction and dismay, I yet
  Despair not of our nature, but retain
  A more than Roman confidence, a faith
  That fails not, in all sorrow my support,
  The blessing of my life; the gift is yours,                        445
  Ye winds and sounding cataracts! 'tis yours,
  Ye mountains! thine, O Nature! Thou hast fed
  My lofty speculations; and in thee,
  For this uneasy heart of ours, I find
  A never-failing principle of joy                                   450
  And purest passion.
                       Thou, my Friend! wert reared
  In the great city, 'mid far other scenes; [a]
  But we, by different roads, at length have gained
  The self-same bourne. And for this cause to thee
  I speak, unapprehensive of contempt,                               455
  The insinuated scoff of coward tongues,
  And all that silent language which so oft
  In conversation between man and man
  Blots from the human countenance all trace
  Of beauty and of love. For thou hast sought                        460
  The truth in solitude, and, since the days
  That gave thee liberty, full long desired,
  To serve in Nature's temple, thou hast been
  The most assiduous of her ministers;
  In many things my brother, chiefly here                            465
  In this our deep devotion.
                              Fare thee well!
  Health and the quiet of a healthful mind
  Attend thee! seeking oft the haunts of men,
  And yet more often living with thyself,
  And for thyself, so haply shall thy days                           470
  Be many, and a blessing to mankind. [b]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The "square" of the "small market village" of Hawkshead
still remains; and the presence of the new "assembly-room" does not
prevent us from realising it as open, with the "rude mass of native rock
left midway" in it--the "old grey stone," which was the centre of the
village sports.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare 'The Excursion', book ix. ll. 487-90:

  'When, on thy bosom, spacious Windermere!
  A Youth, I practised this delightful art;
  Tossed on the waves alone, or 'mid a crew
  Of joyous comrades.'

Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare 'The Excursion', book ix. l. 544, describing "a
fair Isle with birch-trees fringed," where they gathered leaves of that
shy plant (its flower was shed), the lily of the vale.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: These islands in Windermere are easily identified. In the
Lily of the Valley Island the plant still grows, though not abundantly;
but from Lady Holme the

          'ruins of a shrine
  Once to Our Lady dedicate'

have disappeared as completely as the shrine in St. Herbert's Island,
Derwentwater. The third island:

        'musical with birds,
  That sang and ceased not--'

may have been House Holme, or that now called Thomson's Holme. It could
hardly have been Belle Isle; since, from its size, it could not be
described as a "Sister Isle" to the one where the lily of the valley
grew "beneath the oaks' umbrageous covert."--Ed.]


[Footnote E: Doubtless the circle was at Conishead Priory, on the
Cartmell Sands; or that in the vale of Swinside, on the north-east side
of Black Combe; more probably the former. The whole district is rich in
Druidical remains, but Wordsworth would not refer to the Keswick circle,
or to Long Meg and her Daughters in this connection; and the proximity
of the temple on the Cartmell Shore to the Furness Abbey ruins, and the
ease with which it could be visited on holidays by the boys from
Hawkshead school, make it almost certain that he refers to it.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Furness Abbey, founded by Stephen in 1127, in the glen of
the deadly Nightshade--Bekansghyll--so called from the luxuriant
abundance of the plant, and dedicated to St. Mary. (Compare West's
'Antiquities of Furness'.)--Ed.]


[Footnote G: What was the belfry is now a mass of detached ruins.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: Doubtless the Cartmell Sands beyond Ulverston, at the
estuary of the Leven.--Ed.]


[Footnote I: At Bowness.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: The White Lion Inn at Bowness.--Ed.]


[Footnote L: Compare the reference to the "rude piece of self-taught
art," at the Swan Inn, in the first canto of 'The Waggoner', p. 81.
William Hutchinson, in his 'Excursion to the Lakes in 1773 and 1774'
(second edition, 1776, p. 185), mentions "the White Lion Inn at
Bownas."--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Dr. Cradock told me that William Hutchinson--referred to in
the previous note--describes "Bownas church and its cottages," as seen
from the lake, arising "'above the trees'." Wordsworth, reversing the
view, sees "gleams of water through the trees and 'over the tree
tops'"--another instance of minutely exact description.--Ed.]


[Footnote N: Robert Greenwood, afterwards Senior Fellow of Trinity
College, Cambridge.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: Compare 'Lines composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey',
vol. ii. p. 51.--Ed.]


[Footnote P: Wetherlam, or Coniston Old Man, or both.--Ed.]


[Footnote Q:

  "The moon, as it hung over the southernmost shore of Esthwaite, with
  Gunner's How, as seen from Hawkshead rising up boldly to the
  spectator's left hand, would be thus described."

(H. D. Rawnsley.)--Ed.]


[Footnote R: Esthwaite. Compare 'Peter Bell' (vol. ii. p. 13):

  'Where deep and low the hamlets lie
  Beneath their little patch of sky
  And little lot of stars.'

Ed.]


[Footnote S: See in the Appendix to this volume, Note II, p. 388.--Ed.]


[Footnote T: See 'Paradise Lost', ix. l. 249.--Ed.]


[Footnote U: The daily work in Hawkshead School began--by Archbishop
Sandys' ordinance--at 6 A.M. in summer, and 7 A.M. in winter.--Ed.]


[Footnote V: Esthwaite.--Ed.]


[Footnote W: The Rev. John Fleming, of Rayrigg, Windermere, or,
possibly, the Rev. Charles Farish, author of 'The Minstrels of
Winandermere' and 'Black Agnes'. Mr. Carter, who edited 'The Prelude' in
1850, says it was the former, but this is not absolutely certain.--Ed.]


[Footnote X: A "cottage latch"--probably the same as that in use in Dame
Tyson's time--is still on the door of the house where she lived at
Hawkshead.--Ed.]


[Footnote Y: Probably on the western side of the Vale, above the
village. There is but one "'jutting' eminence" on this side of the
valley. It is an old moraine, now grass-covered; and, from this point,
the view both of the village and of the vale is noteworthy. The jutting
eminence, however, may have been a crag, amongst the Colthouse heights,
to the north-east of Hawkshead.--Ed.]


[Footnote Z: Compare in the 'Ode, Intimations of Immortality':

  '... those obstinate questionings
  Of sense and outward things,
  Fallings from us, vanishings,' etc.

Ed.]


[Footnote a: Coleridge's school days were spent at Christ's Hospital in
London. With the above line compare S. T. C.'s 'Frost at Midnight':

                          'I was reared
  In the great city, pent 'mid cloisters dim.'

Ed.]


[Footnote b: Compare 'Stanzas written in my Pocket Copy of Thomsons
"Castle of Indolence,"' vol. ii. p. 305.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK THIRD


RESIDENCE AT CAMBRIDGE


  It was a dreary morning when the wheels
  Rolled over a wide plain o'erhung with clouds,
  And nothing cheered our way till first we saw
  The long-roofed chapel of King's College lift
  Turrets and pinnacles in answering files,                            5
  Extended high above a dusky grove, [A]

    Advancing, we espied upon the road
  A student clothed in gown and tasselled cap,
  Striding along as if o'ertasked by Time,
  Or covetous of exercise and air;                                    10
  He passed--nor was I master of my eyes
  Till he was left an arrow's flight behind.
  As near and nearer to the spot we drew,
  It seemed to suck us in with an eddy's force.
  Onward we drove beneath the Castle; caught,                         15
  While crossing Magdalene Bridge, a glimpse of Cam;
  And at the 'Hoop' alighted, famous Inn. [B]

    My spirit was up, my thoughts were full of hope;
  Some friends I had, acquaintances who there
  Seemed friends, poor simple school-boys, now hung round             20
  With honour and importance: in a world
  Of welcome faces up and down I roved;
  Questions, directions, warnings and advice,
  Flowed in upon me, from all sides; fresh day
  Of pride and pleasure! to myself I seemed                           25
  A man of business and expense, and went
  From shop to shop about my own affairs,
  To Tutor or to Tailor, as befel,
  From street to street with loose and careless mind.

    I was the Dreamer, they the Dream; I roamed                       30
  Delighted through the motley spectacle;
  Gowns, grave, or gaudy, doctors, students, streets,
  Courts, cloisters, flocks of churches, gateways, towers:
  Migration strange for a stripling of the hills,
  A northern villager.
                         As if the change                             35
  Had waited on some Fairy's wand, at once
  Behold me rich in monies, and attired
  In splendid garb, with hose of silk, and hair
  Powdered like rimy trees, when frost is keen.
  My lordly dressing-gown, I pass it by,                              40
  With other signs of manhood that supplied
  The lack of beard.--The weeks went roundly on,
  With invitations, suppers, wine and fruit,
  Smooth housekeeping within, and all without
  Liberal, and suiting gentleman's array.                             45

    The Evangelist St. John my patron was:
  Three Gothic courts are his, and in the first
  Was my abiding-place, a nook obscure; [C]
  Right underneath, the College kitchens made
  A humming sound, less tuneable than bees,                           50
  But hardly less industrious; with shrill notes
  Of sharp command and scolding intermixed.
  Near me hung Trinity's loquacious clock,
  Who never let the quarters, night or day,
  Slip by him unproclaimed, and told the hours                        55
  Twice over with a male and female voice.
  Her pealing organ was my neighbour too;
  And from my pillow, looking forth by light
  Of moon or favouring stars, I could behold
  The antechapel where the statue stood                               60
  Of Newton with his prism and silent face,
  The marble index of a mind for ever
  Voyaging through strange seas of Thought, alone.

    Of College labours, of the Lecturer's room
  All studded round, as thick as chairs could stand,                  65
  With loyal students faithful to their books,
  Half-and-half idlers, hardy recusants,
  And honest dunces--of important days,
  Examinations, when the man was weighed
  As in a balance! of excessive hopes,                                70
  Tremblings withal and commendable fears,
  Small jealousies, and triumphs good or bad,
  Let others that know more speak as they know.
  Such glory was but little sought by me,
  And little won. Yet from the first crude days                       75
  Of settling time in this untried abode,
  I was disturbed at times by prudent thoughts,
  Wishing to hope without a hope, some fears
  About my future worldly maintenance,
  And, more than all, a strangeness in the mind,                      80
  A feeling that I was not for that hour,
  Nor for that place. But wherefore be cast down?
  For (not to speak of Reason and her pure
  Reflective acts to fix the moral law
  Deep in the conscience, nor of Christian Hope,                      85
  Bowing her head before her sister Faith
  As one far mightier), hither I had come,
  Bear witness Truth, endowed with holy powers
  And faculties, whether to work or feel.
  Oft when the dazzling show no longer new                            90
  Had ceased to dazzle, ofttimes did I quit
  My comrades, leave the crowd, buildings and groves,
  And as I paced alone the level fields
  Far from those lovely sights and sounds sublime
  With which I had been conversant, the mind                          95
  Drooped not; but there into herself returning,
  With prompt rebound seemed fresh as heretofore.
  At least I more distinctly recognised
  Her native instincts: let me dare to speak
  A higher language, say that now I felt                             100
  What independent solaces were mine,
  To mitigate the injurious sway of place
  Or circumstance, how far soever changed
  In youth, or to be changed in manhood's prime;
  Or for the few who shall be called to look                         105
  On the long shadows in our evening years,
  Ordained precursors to the night of death.
  As if awakened, summoned, roused, constrained,
  I looked for universal things; perused
  The common countenance of earth and sky:                           110
  Earth, nowhere unembellished by some trace
  Of that first Paradise whence man was driven;
  And sky, whose beauty and bounty are expressed
  By the proud name she bears--the name of Heaven.
  I called on both to teach me what they might;                      115
  Or turning the mind in upon herself
  Pored, watched, expected, listened, spread my thoughts
  And spread them with a wider creeping; felt
  Incumbencies more awful, visitings
  Of the Upholder of the tranquil soul,                              120
  That tolerates the indignities of Time,
  And, from the centre of Eternity
  All finite motions overruling, lives
  In glory immutable. But peace! enough
  Here to record that I was mounting now                             125
  To such community with highest truth--
  A track pursuing, not untrod before,
  From strict analogies by thought supplied
  Or consciousnesses not to be subdued.
  To every natural form, rock, fruit or flower,                      130
  Even the loose stones that cover the high-way,
  I gave a moral life: I saw them feel,
  Or linked them to some feeling: the great mass
  Lay bedded in a quickening soul, and all
  That I beheld respired with inward meaning.                        135
  Add that whate'er of Terror or of Love
  Or Beauty, Nature's daily face put on
  From transitory passion, unto this
  I was as sensitive as waters are
  To the sky's influence in a kindred mood                           140
  Of passion; was obedient as a lute
  That waits upon the touches of the wind.
  Unknown, unthought of, yet I was most rich--
  I had a world about me--'twas my own;
  I made it, for it only lived to me,                                145
  And to the God who sees into the heart.
  Such sympathies, though rarely, were betrayed
  By outward gestures and by visible looks:
  Some called it madness--so indeed it was,
  If child-like fruitfulness in passing joy,                         150
  If steady moods of thoughtfulness matured
  To inspiration, sort with such a name;
  If prophecy be madness; if things viewed
  By poets in old time, and higher up
  By the first men, earth's first inhabitants,                       155
  May in these tutored days no more be seen
  With undisordered sight. But leaving this,
  It was no madness, for the bodily eye
  Amid my strongest workings evermore
  Was searching out the lines of difference                          160
  As they lie hid in all external forms,
  Near or remote, minute or vast, an eye
  Which from a tree, a stone, a withered leaf,
  To the broad ocean and the azure heavens
  Spangled with kindred multitudes of stars,                         165
  Could find no surface where its power might sleep;
  Which spake perpetual logic to my soul,
  And by an unrelenting agency
  Did bind my feelings even as in a chain.

    And here, O Friend! have I retraced my life                      170
  Up to an eminence, and told a tale
  Of matters which not falsely may be called
  The glory of my youth. Of genius, power,
  Creation and divinity itself
  I have been speaking, for my theme has been                        175
  What passed within me. Not of outward things
  Done visibly for other minds, words, signs,
  Symbols or actions, but of my own heart
  Have I been speaking, and my youthful mind.
  O Heavens! how awful is the might of souls,                        180
  And what they do within themselves while yet
  The yoke of earth is new to them, the world
  Nothing but a wild field where they were sown.
  This is, in truth, heroic argument,
  This genuine prowess, which I wished to touch                      185
  With hand however weak, but in the main
  It lies far hidden from the reach of words.
  Points have we all of us within our souls
  Where all stand single; this I feel, and make
  Breathings for incommunicable powers;                              190
  But is not each a memory to himself?
  And, therefore, now that we must quit this theme,
  I am not heartless, for there's not a man
  That lives who hath not known his god-like hours,
  And feels not what an empire we inherit                            195
  As natural beings in the strength of Nature.

    No more: for now into a populous plain
  We must descend. A Traveller I am,
  Whose tale is only of himself; even so,
  So be it, if the pure of heart be prompt                           200
  To follow, and if thou, my honoured Friend!
  Who in these thoughts art ever at my side,
  Support, as heretofore, my fainting steps.

    It hath been told, that when the first delight
  That flashed upon me from this novel show                          205
  Had failed, the mind returned into herself;
  Yet true it is, that I had made a change
  In climate, and my nature's outward coat
  Changed also slowly and insensibly.
  Full oft the quiet and exalted thoughts                            210
  Of loneliness gave way to empty noise
  And superficial pastimes; now and then
  Forced labour, and more frequently forced hopes;
  And, worst of all, a treasonable growth
  Of indecisive judgments, that impaired                             215
  And shook the mind's simplicity.--And yet
  This was a gladsome time. Could I behold--
  Who, less insensible than sodden clay
  In a sea-river's bed at ebb of tide,
  Could have beheld,--with undelighted heart,                        220
  So many happy youths, so wide and fair
  A congregation in its budding-time
  Of health, and hope, and beauty, all at once
  So many divers samples from the growth
  Of life's sweet season--could have seen unmoved                    225
  That miscellaneous garland of wild flowers
  Decking the matron temples of a place
  So famous through the world? To me, at least,
  It was a goodly prospect: for, in sooth,
  Though I had learnt betimes to stand unpropped,                    230
  And independent musings pleased me so
  That spells seemed on me when I was alone,
  Yet could I only cleave to solitude
  In lonely places; if a throng was near
  That way I leaned by nature; for my heart                          235
  Was social, and loved idleness and joy.

    Not seeking those who might participate
  My deeper pleasures (nay, I had not once,
  Though not unused to mutter lonesome songs,
  Even with myself divided such delight,                             240
  Or looked that way for aught that might be clothed
  In human language), easily I passed
  From the remembrances of better things,
  And slipped into the ordinary works
  Of careless youth, unburthened, unalarmed.                         245
  _Caverns_ there were within my mind which sun
  Could never penetrate, yet did there not
  Want store of leafy _arbours_ where the light
  Might enter in at will. Companionships,
  Friendships, acquaintances, were welcome all.                      250
  We sauntered, played, or rioted; we talked
  Unprofitable talk at morning hours;
  Drifted about along the streets and walks,
  Read lazily in trivial books, went forth
  To gallop through the country in blind zeal                        255
  Of senseless horsemanship, or on the breast
  Of Cam sailed boisterously, and let the stars
  Come forth, perhaps without one quiet thought.

    Such was the tenor of the second act
  In this new life. Imagination slept,                               260
  And yet not utterly. I could not print
  Ground where the grass had yielded to the steps
  Of generations of illustrious men,
  Unmoved. I could not always lightly pass
  Through the same gateways, sleep where they had slept,             265
  Wake where they waked, range that inclosure old,
  That garden of great intellects, undisturbed.
  Place also by the side of this dark sense
  Of noble feeling, that those spiritual men,
  Even the great Newton's own ethereal self,                         270
  Seemed humbled in these precincts thence to be
  The more endeared. Their several memories here
  (Even like their persons in their portraits clothed
  With the accustomed garb of daily life)
  Put on a lowly and a touching grace                                275
  Of more distinct humanity, that left
  All genuine admiration unimpaired.

    Beside the pleasant Mill of Trompington [D]
  I laughed with Chaucer in the hawthorn shade;
  Heard him, while birds were warbling, tell his tales               280
  Of amorous passion. And that gentle Bard,
  Chosen by the Muses for their Page of State--
  Sweet Spenser, moving through his clouded heaven
  With the moon's beauty and the moon's soft pace,
  I called him Brother, Englishman, and Friend!                      285
  Yea, our blind Poet, who, in his later day,
  Stood almost single; uttering odious truth--
  Darkness before, and danger's voice behind,
  Soul awful--if the earth has ever lodged
  An awful soul--I seemed to see him here                            290
  Familiarly, and in his scholar's dress
  Bounding before me, yet a stripling youth--
  A boy, no better, with his rosy cheeks
  Angelical, keen eye, courageous look,
  And conscious step of purity and pride.                            295
  Among the band of my compeers was one
  Whom chance had stationed in the very room
  Honoured by Milton's name. O temperate Bard!
  Be it confest that, for the first time, seated
  Within thy innocent lodge and oratory,                             300
  One of a festive circle, I poured out
  Libations, to thy memory drank, till pride
  And gratitude grew dizzy in a brain
  Never excited by the fumes of wine
  Before that hour, or since. Then, forth I ran                      305
  From the assembly; through a length of streets,
  Ran, ostrich-like, to reach our chapel door
  In not a desperate or opprobrious time,
  Albeit long after the importunate bell
  Had stopped, with wearisome Cassandra voice                        310
  No longer haunting the dark winter night.
  Call back, O Friend! [E] a moment to thy mind,
  The place itself and fashion of the rites.
  With careless ostentation shouldering up
  My surplice, [F] through the inferior throng I clove               315
  Of the plain Burghers, who in audience stood
  On the last skirts of their permitted ground,
  Under the pealing organ. Empty thoughts!
  I am ashamed of them: and that great Bard,
  And thou, O Friend! who in thy ample mind                          320
  Hast placed me high above my best deserts,
  Ye will forgive the weakness of that hour,
  In some of its unworthy vanities,
  Brother to many more.
                            In this mixed sort
  The months passed on, remissly, not given up                       325
  To wilful alienation from the right,
  Or walks of open scandal, but in vague
  And loose indifference, easy likings, aims
  Of a low pitch--duty and zeal dismissed,
  Yet Nature, or a happy course of things                            330
  Not doing in their stead the needful work.
  The memory languidly revolved, the heart
  Reposed in noontide rest, the inner pulse
  Of contemplation almost failed to beat.
  Such life might not inaptly be compared                            335
  To a floating island, an amphibious spot
  Unsound, of spongy texture, yet withal
  Not wanting a fair face of water weeds
  And pleasant flowers. [G] The thirst of living praise,
  Fit reverence for the glorious Dead, the sight                     340
  Of those long vistas, sacred catacombs,
  Where mighty minds lie visibly entombed,
  Have often stirred the heart of youth, and bred
  A fervent love of rigorous discipline.--
  Alas! such high emotion touched not me.                            345
  Look was there none within these walls to shame
  My easy spirits, and discountenance
  Their light composure, far less to instil
  A calm resolve of mind, firmly addressed
  To puissant efforts. Nor was this the blame                        350
  Of others, but my own; I should, in truth,
  As far as doth concern my single self,
  Misdeem most widely, lodging it elsewhere:
  For I, bred up 'mid Nature's luxuries,
  Was a spoiled child, and rambling like the wind,                   355
  As I had done in daily intercourse
  With those crystalline rivers, solemn heights,
  And mountains, ranging like a fowl of the air,
  I was ill-tutored for captivity;
  To quit my pleasure, and, from month to month,                     360
  Take up a station calmly on the perch
  Of sedentary peace. Those lovely forms
  Had also left less space within my mind,
  Which, wrought upon instinctively, had found
  A freshness in those objects of her love,                          365
  A winning power, beyond all other power.
  Not that I slighted books, [H]--that were to lack
  All sense,--but other passions in me ruled,
  Passions more fervent, making me less prompt
  To in-door study than was wise or well,                            370
  Or suited to those years. Yet I, though used
  In magisterial liberty to rove,
  Culling such flowers of learning as might tempt
  A random choice, could shadow forth a place
  (If now I yield not to a flattering dream)                         375
  Whose studious aspect should have bent me down
  To instantaneous service; should at once
  Have made me pay to science and to arts
  And written lore, acknowledged my liege lord,
  A homage frankly offered up, like that                             380
  Which I had paid to Nature. Toil and pains
  In this recess, by thoughtful Fancy built,
  Should spread from heart to heart; and stately groves,
  Majestic edifices, should not want
  A corresponding dignity within.                                    385
  The congregating temper that pervades
  Our unripe years, not wasted, should be taught
  To minister to works of high attempt--
  Works which the enthusiast would perform with love.
  Youth should be awed, religiously possessed                        390
  With a conviction of the power that waits
  On knowledge, when sincerely sought and prized
  For its own sake, on glory and on praise
  If but by labour won, and fit to endure
  The passing day; should learn to put aside                         395
  Her trappings here, should strip them off abashed
  Before antiquity and stedfast truth
  And strong book-mindedness; and over all
  A healthy sound simplicity should reign,
  A seemly plainness, name it what you will,                         400
  Republican or pious.
                         If these thoughts
  Are a gratuitous emblazonry
  That mocks the recreant age _we_ live in, then
  Be Folly and False-seeming free to affect
  Whatever formal gait of discipline                                 405
  Shall raise them highest in their own esteem--
  Let them parade among the Schools at will,
  But spare the House of God. Was ever known
  The witless shepherd who persists to drive
  A flock that thirsts not to a pool disliked?                       410
  A weight must surely hang on days begun
  And ended with such mockery. Be wise,
  Ye Presidents and Deans, and, till the spirit
  Of ancient times revive, and youth be trained
  At home in pious service, to your bells                            415
  Give seasonable rest, for 'tis a sound
  Hollow as ever vexed the tranquil air;
  And your officious doings bring disgrace
  On the plain steeples of our English Church,
  Whose worship, 'mid remotest village trees,                        420
  Suffers for this. Even Science, too, at hand
  In daily sight of this irreverence,
  Is smitten thence with an unnatural taint,
  Loses her just authority, falls beneath
  Collateral suspicion, else unknown.                                425
  This truth escaped me not, and I confess,
  That having 'mid my native hills given loose
  To a schoolboy's vision, I had raised a pile
  Upon the basis of the coming time,
  That fell in ruins round me. Oh, what joy                          430
  To see a sanctuary for our country's youth
  Informed with such a spirit as might be
  Its own protection; a primeval grove,
  Where, though the shades with cheerfulness were filled,
  Nor indigent of songs warbled from crowds                          435
  In under-coverts, yet the countenance
  Of the whole place should bear a stamp of awe;
  A habitation sober and demure
  For ruminating creatures; a domain
  For quiet things to wander in; a haunt                             440
  In which the heron should delight to feed
  By the shy rivers, and the pelican
  Upon the cypress spire in lonely thought
  Might sit and sun himself.--Alas! Alas!
  In vain for such solemnity I looked;                               445
  Mine eyes were crossed by butterflies, ears vexed
  By chattering popinjays; the inner heart
  Seemed trivial, and the impresses without
  Of a too gaudy region.
                            Different sight
  Those venerable Doctors saw of old,                                450
  When all who dwelt within these famous walls
  Led in abstemiousness a studious life;
  When, in forlorn and naked chambers cooped
  And crowded, o'er the ponderous books they hung
  Like caterpillars eating out their way                             455
  In silence, or with keen devouring noise
  Not to be tracked or fathered. Princes then
  At matins froze, and couched at curfew-time,
  Trained up through piety and zeal to prize
  Spare diet, patient labour, and plain weeds.                       460
  O seat of Arts! renowned throughout the world!
  Far different service in those homely days
  The Muses' modest nurslings underwent
  From their first childhood: in that glorious time
  When Learning, like a stranger come from far,                      465
  Sounding through Christian lands her trumpet, roused
  Peasant and king; when boys and youths, the growth
  Of ragged villages and crazy huts,
  Forsook their homes, and, errant in the quest
  Of Patron, famous school or friendly nook,                         470
  Where, pensioned, they in shelter might sit down,
  From town to town and through wide scattered realms
  Journeyed with ponderous folios in their hands;
  And often, starting from some covert place,
  Saluted the chance comer on the road,                              475
  Crying, "An obolus, a penny give
  To a poor scholar!" [I]--when illustrious men,
  Lovers of truth, by penury constrained,
  Bucer, Erasmus, or Melancthon, read
  Before the doors or windows of their cells                         480
  By moonshine through mere lack of taper light.

    But peace to vain regrets! We see but darkly
  Even when we look behind us, and best things
  Are not so pure by nature that they needs
  Must keep to all, as fondly all believe,                           485
  Their highest promise. If the mariner,
  When at reluctant distance he hath passed
  Some tempting island, could but know the ills
  That must have fallen upon him had he brought
  His bark to land upon the wished-for shore,                        490
  Good cause would oft be his to thank the surf
  Whose white belt scared him thence, or wind that blew
  Inexorably adverse: for myself
  I grieve not; happy is the gowned youth,
  Who only misses what I missed, who falls                           495
  No lower than I fell.

                           I did not love,
  Judging not ill perhaps, the timid course
  Of our scholastic studies; could have wished
  To see the river flow with ampler range
  And freer pace; but more, far more, I grieved                      500
  To see displayed among an eager few,
  Who in the field of contest persevered,
  Passions unworthy of youth's generous heart
  And mounting spirit, pitiably repaid,
  When so disturbed, whatever palms are won.                         505
  From these I turned to travel with the shoal
  Of more unthinking natures, easy minds
  And pillowy; yet not wanting love that makes
  The day pass lightly on, when foresight sleeps,
  And wisdom and the pledges interchanged                            510
  With our own inner being are forgot.

    Yet was this deep vacation not given up
  To utter waste. Hitherto I had stood
  In my own mind remote from social life,
  (At least from what we commonly so name,)                          515
  Like a lone shepherd on a promontory
  Who lacking occupation looks far forth
  Into the boundless sea, and rather makes
  Than finds what he beholds. And sure it is,
  That this first transit from the smooth delights                   520
  And wild outlandish walks of simple youth
  To something that resembles an approach
  Towards human business, to a privileged world
  Within a world, a midway residence
  With all its intervenient imagery,                                 525
  Did better suit my visionary mind,
  Far better, than to have been bolted forth;
  Thrust out abruptly into Fortune's way
  Among the conflicts of substantial life;
  By a more just gradation did lead on                               530
  To higher things; more naturally matured,
  For permanent possession, better fruits,
  Whether of truth or virtue, to ensue.
  In serious mood, but oftener, I confess,
  With playful zest of fancy did we note                             535
  (How could we less?) the manners and the ways
  Of those who lived distinguished by the badge
  Of good or ill report; or those with whom
  By frame of Academic discipline
  We were perforce connected, men whose sway                         540
  And known authority of office served
  To set our minds on edge, and did no more.
  Nor wanted we rich pastime of this kind,
  Found everywhere, but chiefly in the ring
  Of the grave Elders, men unsecured, grotesque                      545
  In character, tricked out like aged trees
  Which through the lapse of their infirmity
  Give ready place to any random seed
  That chooses to be reared upon their trunks.

    Here on my view, confronting vividly                             550
  Those shepherd swains whom I had lately left,
  Appeared a different aspect of old age;
  How different! yet both distinctly marked,
  Objects embossed to catch the general eye,
  Or portraitures for special use designed,                          555
  As some might seem, so aptly do they serve
  To illustrate Nature's book of rudiments--
  That book upheld as with maternal care
  When she would enter on her tender scheme
  Of teaching comprehension with delight,                            560
  And mingling playful with pathetic thoughts.

    The surfaces of artificial life
  And manners finely wrought, the delicate race
  Of colours, lurking, gleaming up and down
  Through that state arras woven with silk and gold;                 565
  This wily interchange of snaky hues,
  Willingly or unwillingly revealed,
  I neither knew nor cared for; and as such
  Were wanting here, I took what might be found
  Of less elaborate fabric. At this day                              570
  I smile, in many a mountain solitude
  Conjuring up scenes as obsolete in freaks
  Of character, in points of wit as broad,
  As aught by wooden images performed
  For entertainment of the gaping crowd                              575
  At wake or fair. And oftentimes do flit
  Remembrances before me of old men--
  Old humourists, who have been long in their graves,
  And having almost in my mind put off
  Their human names, have into phantoms passed                       580
  Of texture midway between life and books.

    I play the loiterer: 'tis enough to note
  That here in dwarf proportions were expressed
  The limbs of the great world; its eager strifes
  Collaterally pourtrayed, as in mock fight,                         585
  A tournament of blows, some hardly dealt
  Though short of mortal combat; and whate'er
  Might in this pageant be supposed to hit
  An artless rustic's notice, this way less,
  More that way, was not wasted upon me--590
  And yet the spectacle may well demand
  A more substantial name, no mimic show,
  Itself a living part of a live whole,
  A creek in the vast sea; for, all degrees
  And shapes of spurious fame and short-lived praise                 595
  Here sate in state, and fed with daily alms
  Retainers won away from solid good;
  And here was Labour, his own bond-slave; Hope,
  That never set the pains against the prize;
  Idleness halting with his weary clog,                              600
  And poor misguided Shame, and witless Fear,
  And simple Pleasure foraging for Death;
  Honour misplaced, and Dignity astray;
  Feuds, factions, flatteries, enmity, and guile
  Murmuring submission, and bald government,                         605
  (The idol weak as the idolater),
  And Decency and Custom starving Truth,
  And blind Authority beating with his staff
  The child that might have led him; Emptiness
  Followed as of good omen, and meek Worth                           610
  Left to herself unheard of and unknown.

    Of these and other kindred notices
  I cannot say what portion is in truth
  The naked recollection of that time,
  And what may rather have been called to life                       615
  By after-meditation. But delight
  That, in an easy temper lulled asleep,
  Is still with Innocence its own reward,
  This was not wanting. Carelessly I roamed
  As through a wide museum from whose stores                         620
  A casual rarity is singled out
  And has its brief perusal, then gives way
  To others, all supplanted in their turn;
  Till 'mid this crowded neighbourhood of things
  That are by nature most unneighbourly,                             625
  The head turns round and cannot right itself;
  And though an aching and a barren sense
  Of gay confusion still be uppermost,
  With few wise longings and but little love,
  Yet to the memory something cleaves at last,                       630
  Whence profit may be drawn in times to come.

    Thus in submissive idleness, my Friend!
  The labouring time of autumn, winter, spring,
  Eight months! rolled pleasingly away; the ninth
  Came and returned me to my native hills.                           635


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Wordsworth went from York to Cambridge, entering it by the
coach road from the north-west. This was doubtless the road which now
leads to the city from Girton. "The long-roofed chapel of King's
College" must have been seen from that road.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: The Hoop Inn still exists, not now so famous as in the end
of last century.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: He entered St. John's College in October 1787. His rooms in
the College were unknown to the officials a dozen years ago, although
they are pretty clearly indicated by Wordsworth in this passage. They
were in the first of the three courts of St. John's; they were above the
College kitchens; and from the window of his bedroom he could look into
the antechapel of Trinity, with its statue of Newton. They have been
recently removed in connection with sundry improvements in the college
kitchen. For details, see the 'Life of Wordsworth' which will follow
this edition of his Works.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: A village two and a half miles south of Cambridge.

  "There are still some remains of the mill here celebrated by Chaucer
  in his Reve's Tale."

(Lewis' 'Topographical Dictionary of England', vol. iv. p. 390.)--Ed.]


[Footnote E: S. T. C., who entered Cambridge when Wordsworth left
it.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: On certain days a surplice is worn, instead of a gown, by
the undergraduates.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: Compare the poem 'Floating Island', by Dorothy
Wordsworth.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: The following extract from a letter of Dorothy Wordsworth's
illustrates the above and other passages of this book. It was written
from Forncett, on the 26th of June, 1791. She is speaking of her two
brothers, William and Christopher. Of Christopher she says:

  "His abilities, though not so great, perhaps, as his brother's, may be
  of more use to him, as he has not fixed his mind upon any particular
  species of reading or conceived an aversion to any. He is not fond of
  mathematics, but has resolution sufficient to study them; because it
  will be impossible for him to obtain a fellowship without them.
  William lost the chance, indeed the certainty, of a fellowship, by not
  combating his inclinations. He gave way to his natural dislike to
  studies so dry as many parts of the mathematics, consequently could
  not succeed in Cambridge. He reads Italian, Spanish, French, Greek,
  Latin, and English; but never opens a mathematical book.... Do not
  think from what I have said that he reads not at all; for he does read
  a great deal, and not only poetry, in these languages he is acquainted
  with, but History also," etc. etc.

Ed.]


[Footnote I: 'Date obolum Belisario'. Belisarius, a general of the
Emperor Justinian's, died 564 A.D. The story of his begging charity is
probably a legend, but the "begging scholar" was common in Christendom
throughout the Middle Ages, and was met with in the last century.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK FOURTH


SUMMER VACATION


  Bright was the summer's noon when quickening steps
  Followed each other till a dreary moor
  Was crossed, a bare ridge clomb, upon whose top [A]
  Standing alone, as from a rampart's edge,
  I overlooked the bed of Windermere,                                  5
  Like a vast river, stretching in the sun.
  With exultation, at my feet I saw
  Lake, islands, promontories, gleaming bays,
  A universe of Nature's fairest forms
  Proudly revealed with instantaneous burst,                          10
  Magnificent, and beautiful, and gay.
  I bounded down the hill shouting amain
  For the old Ferryman; to the shout the rocks
  Replied, and when the Charon of the flood
  Had staid his oars, and touched the jutting pier, [B]               15
  I did not step into the well-known boat
  Without a cordial greeting. Thence with speed
  Up the familiar hill I took my way [C]
  Towards that sweet Valley [D] where I had been reared;
  'Twas but a short hour's walk, ere veering round                    20
  I saw the snow-white church upon her hill [E]
  Sit like a throned Lady, sending out
  A gracious look all over her domain. [F]
  Yon azure smoke betrays the lurking town;
  With eager footsteps I advance and reach                            25
  The cottage threshold where my journey closed.
  Glad welcome had I, with some tears, perhaps,
  From my old Dame, so kind and motherly, [G]
  While she perused me with a parent's pride.
  The thoughts of gratitude shall fall like dew                       30
  Upon thy grave, good creature! While my heart
  Can beat never will I forget thy name.
  Heaven's blessing be upon thee where thou liest
  After thy innocent and busy stir
  In narrow cares, thy little daily growth                            35
  Of calm enjoyments, after eighty years,
  And more than eighty, of untroubled life, [H]
  Childless, yet by the strangers to thy blood
  Honoured with little less than filial love.
  What joy was mine to see thee once again,                           40
  Thee and thy dwelling, and a crowd of things
  About its narrow precincts all beloved, [I]
  And many of them seeming yet my own!
  Why should I speak of what a thousand hearts
  Have felt, and every man alive can guess?                           45
  The rooms, the court, the garden were not left
  Long unsaluted, nor the sunny seat
  Round the stone table under the dark pine, [K]
  Friendly to studious or to festive hours;
  Nor that unruly child of mountain birth,                            50
  The famous brook, who, soon as he was boxed
  Within our garden, [L] found himself at once,
  As if by trick insidious and unkind,
  Stripped of his voice [M] and left to dimple down
  (Without an effort and without a will)                              55
  A channel paved by man's officious care. [N]
  I looked at him and smiled, and smiled again,
  And in the press of twenty thousand thoughts, [O]
  "Ha," quoth I, "pretty prisoner, are you there!"
  Well might sarcastic Fancy then have whispered,                     60
  "An emblem here behold of thy own life;
  In its late course of even days with all
  Their smooth enthralment;" but the heart was full,
  Too full for that reproach. My aged Dame
  Walked proudly at my side: she guided me;                           65
  I willing, nay--nay, wishing to be led.
--The face of every neighbour whom I met
  Was like a volume to me; some were hailed
  Upon the road, some busy at their work,
  Unceremonious greetings interchanged                                70
  With half the length of a long field between.
  Among my schoolfellows I scattered round
  Like recognitions, but with some constraint
  Attended, doubtless, with a little pride,
  But with more shame, for my habiliments,                            75
  The transformation wrought by gay attire.
  Not less delighted did I take my place
  At our domestic table: and, [P] dear Friend
  In this endeavour simply to relate
  A Poet's history, may I leave untold                                80
  The thankfulness with which I laid me down
  In my accustomed bed, more welcome now
  Perhaps than if it had been more desired
  Or been more often thought of with regret;
  That lowly bed whence I had heard the wind                          85
  Roar and the rain beat hard, where I so oft
  Had lain awake on summer nights to watch
  The moon in splendour couched among the leaves
  Of a tall ash, that near our cottage stood; [Q]
  Had watched her with fixed eyes while to and fro                    90
  In the dark summit of the waving tree
  She rocked with every impulse of the breeze.

    Among the favourites whom it pleased me well
  To see again, was one by ancient right
  Our inmate, a rough terrier of the hills;                           95
  By birth and call of nature pre-ordained
  To hunt the badger and unearth the fox
  Among the impervious crags, but having been
  From youth our own adopted, he had passed
  Into a gentler service. And when first                             100
  The boyish spirit flagged, and day by day
  Along my veins I kindled with the stir,
  The fermentation, and the vernal heat
  Of poesy, affecting private shades
  Like a sick Lover, then this dog was used                          105
  To watch me, an attendant and a friend,
  Obsequious to my steps early and late,
  Though often of such dilatory walk
  Tired, and uneasy at the halts I made.
  A hundred times when, roving high and low                          110
  I have been harassed with the toil of verse,
  Much pains and little progress, and at once
  Some lovely Image in the song rose up
  Full-formed, like Venus rising from the sea;
  Then have I darted forwards to let                                 115
  My hand upon his back with stormy joy,
  Caressing him again and yet again.
  And when at evening on the public way
  I sauntered, like a river murmuring
  And talking to itself when all things                              120
  Are still, the creature trotted on before;
  Such was his custom; but whene'er he met
  A passenger approaching, he would turn
  To give me timely notice, and straightway,
  Grateful for that admonishment, I                                  125
  My voice, composed my gait, and, with the air
  And mien of one whose thoughts are free, advanced
  To give and take a greeting that might save
  My name from piteous rumours, such as wait
  On men suspected to be crazed in brain.                            130

  Those walks well worthy to be prized and loved--
  Regretted!--that word, too, was on my tongue,
  But they were richly laden with all good,
  And cannot be remembered but with thanks
  And gratitude, and perfect joy of heart--135
  Those walks in all their freshness now came back
  Like a returning Spring. When first I made
  Once more the circuit of our little lake,
  If ever happiness hath lodged with man,
  That day consummate happiness was mine,                            140
  Wide-spreading, steady, calm, contemplative.
  The sun was set, or setting, when I left
  Our cottage door, and evening soon brought on
  A sober hour, not winning or serene,
  For cold and raw the air was, and untuned;                         145
  But as a face we love is sweetest then
  When sorrow damps it, or, whatever look
  It chance to wear, is sweetest if the heart
  Have fulness in herself; even so with me
  It fared that evening. Gently did my soul                          150
  Put off her veil, and, self-transmuted, stood
  Naked, as in the presence of her God.
  While on I walked, a comfort seemed to touch
  A heart that had not been disconsolate:
  Strength came where weakness was not known to be,                  155
  At least not felt; and restoration came
  Like an intruder knocking at the door
  Of unacknowledged weariness. I took
  The balance, and with firm hand weighed myself.
--Of that external scene which round me lay,                       160
  Little, in this abstraction, did I see;
  Remembered less; but I had inward hopes
  And swellings of the spirit, was rapt and soothed,
  Conversed with promises, had glimmering views
  How life pervades the undecaying mind;                             165
  How the immortal soul with God-like power
  Informs, creates, and thaws the deepest sleep
  That time can lay upon her; how on earth,
  Man, if he do but live within the light
  Of high endeavours, daily spreads abroad                           170
  His being armed with strength that cannot fail.
  Nor was there want of milder thoughts, of love
  Of innocence, and holiday repose;
  And more than pastoral quiet, 'mid the stir
  Of boldest projects, and a peaceful end                            175
  At last, or glorious, by endurance won.
  Thus musing, in a wood I sate me down
  Alone, continuing there to muse: the slopes
  And heights meanwhile were slowly overspread
  With darkness, and before a rippling breeze                        180
  The long lake lengthened out its hoary line,
  And in the sheltered coppice where I sate,
  Around me from among the hazel leaves,
  Now here, now there, moved by the straggling wind,
  Came ever and anon a breath-like sound,                            185
  Quick as the pantings of the faithful dog,
  The off and on companion of my walk;
  And such, at times, believing them to be,
  I turned my head to look if he were there;
  Then into solemn thought I passed once more.                       190

  A freshness also found I at this time
  In human Life, the daily life of those
  Whose occupations really I loved;
  The peaceful scene oft filled me with surprise
  Changed like a garden in the heat of spring                        195
  After an eight-days' absence. For (to omit
  The things which were the same and yet appeared
  Fair otherwise) amid this rural solitude,
  A narrow Vale where each was known to all,
  'Twas not indifferent to a youthful mind                           200
  To mark some sheltering bower or sunny nook,
  Where an old man had used to sit alone,
  Now vacant; pale-faced babes whom I had left
  In arms, now rosy prattlers at the feet
  Of a pleased grandame tottering up and down;                       205
  And growing girls whose beauty, filched away
  With all its pleasant promises, was gone
  To deck some slighted playmate's homely cheek.

    Yes, I had something of a subtler sense,
  And often looking round was moved to smiles                        210
  Such as a delicate work of humour breeds;
  I read, without design, the opinions, thoughts,
  Of those plain-living people now observed
  With clearer knowledge; with another eye
  I saw the quiet woodman in the woods,                              215
  The shepherd roam the hills. With new delight,
  This chiefly, did I note my grey-haired Dame;
  Saw her go forth to church or other work
  Of state, equipped in monumental trim;
  Short velvet cloak, (her bonnet of the like),                      220
  A mantle such as Spanish Cavaliers
  Wore in old time. Her smooth domestic life,
  Affectionate without disquietude,
  Her talk, her business, pleased me; and no less
  Her clear though shallow stream of piety                           225
  That ran on Sabbath days a fresher course;
  With thoughts unfelt till now I saw her read
  Her Bible on hot Sunday afternoons,
  And loved the book, when she had dropped asleep
  And made of it a pillow for her head.                              230

    Nor less do I remember to have felt,
  Distinctly manifested at this time,
  A human-heartedness about my love
  For objects hitherto the absolute wealth
  Of my own private being and no more:                               235
  Which I had loved, even as a blessed spirit
  Or Angel, if he were to dwell on earth,
  Might love in individual happiness.
  But now there opened on me other thoughts
  Of change, congratulation or regret,                               240
  A pensive feeling! It spread far and wide;
  The trees, the mountains shared it, and the brooks,
  The stars of Heaven, now seen in their old haunts--
  White Sirius glittering o'er the southern crags,
  Orion with his belt, and those fair Seven,                         245
  Acquaintances of every little child,
  And Jupiter, my own beloved star!
  Whatever shadings of mortality,
  Whatever imports from the world of death
  Had come among these objects heretofore,                           250
  Were, in the main, of mood less tender: strong,
  Deep, gloomy were they, and severe; the scatterings
  Of awe or tremulous dread, that had given way
  In later youth to yearnings of a love
  Enthusiastic, to delight and hope.                                 255

    As one who hangs down-bending from the side
  Of a slow-moving boat, upon the breast
  Of a still water, solacing himself
  With such discoveries as his eye can make
  Beneath him in the bottom of the deep,                             260
  Sees many beauteous sights--weeds, fishes, flowers.
  Grots, pebbles, roots of trees, and fancies more,
  Yet often is perplexed and cannot part
  The shadow from the substance, rocks and sky,
  Mountains and clouds, reflected in the depth                       265
  Of the clear flood, from things which there abide
  In their true dwelling; now is crossed by gleam
  Of his own image, by a sun-beam now,
  And wavering motions sent he knows not whence,
  Impediments that make his task more sweet;                         270
  Such pleasant office have we long pursued
  Incumbent o'er the surface of past time
  With like success, nor often have appeared
  Shapes fairer or less doubtfully discerned
  Than these to which the Tale, indulgent Friend!                    275
  Would now direct thy notice. Yet in spite
  Of pleasure won, and knowledge not withheld,
  There was an inner falling off--I loved,
  Loved deeply all that had been loved before,
  More deeply even than ever: but a swarm                            280
  Of heady schemes jostling each other, gawds,
  And feast and dance, and public revelry,
  And sports and games (too grateful in themselves,
  Yet in themselves less grateful, I believe,
  Than as they were a badge glossy and fresh                         285
  Of manliness and freedom) all conspired
  To lure my mind from firm habitual quest
  Of feeding pleasures, to depress the zeal
  And damp those yearnings which had once been mine--
  A wild, unworldly-minded youth, given up                           290
  To his own eager thoughts. It would demand
  Some skill, and longer time than may be spared,
  To paint these vanities, and how they wrought
  In haunts where they, till now, had been unknown.
  It seemed the very garments that I wore                            295
  Preyed on my strength, and stopped the quiet stream
  Of self-forgetfulness.
                         Yes, that heartless chase
  Of trivial pleasures was a poor exchange
  For books and nature at that early age.
  'Tis true, some casual knowledge might be gained                   300
  Of character or life; but at that time,
  Of manners put to school I took small note,
  And all my deeper passions lay elsewhere.
  Far better had it been to exalt the mind
  By solitary study, to uphold                                       305
  Intense desire through meditative peace;
  And yet, for chastisement of these regrets,
  The memory of one particular hour
  Doth here rise up against me. 'Mid a throng
  Of maids and youths, old men, and matrons staid,                   310
  A medley of all tempers, I had passed
  The night in dancing, gaiety, and mirth,
  With din of instruments and shuffling feet,
  And glancing forms, and tapers glittering,
  And unaimed prattle flying up and down; [R]                        315
  Spirits upon the stretch, and here and there
  Slight shocks of young love-liking interspersed,
  Whose transient pleasure mounted to the head,
  And tingled through the veins. Ere we retired,
  The cock had crowed, and now the eastern sky                       320
  Was kindling, not unseen, from humble copse
  And open field, through which the pathway wound,
  And homeward led my steps. Magnificent
  The morning rose, in memorable pomp,
  Glorious as e'er I had beheld--in front,                           325
  The sea lay laughing at a distance; near,
  The solid mountains shone, bright as the clouds,
  Grain-tinctured, drenched in empyrean light;
  And in the meadows and the lower grounds
  Was all the sweetness of a common dawn--330
  Dews, vapours, and the melody of birds, [S]
  And labourers going forth to till the fields.
  Ah! need I say, dear Friend! that to the brim
  My heart was full; I made no vows, but vows
  Were then made for me; bond unknown to me                          335
  Was given, that I should be, else sinning greatly,
  A dedicated Spirit. On I walked
  In thankful blessedness, which yet survives. [T]

    Strange rendezvous! My mind was at that time
  A parti-coloured show of grave and gay,                            340
  Solid and light, short-sighted and profound;
  Of inconsiderate habits and sedate,
  Consorting in one mansion unreproved.
  The worth I knew of powers that I possessed,
  Though slighted and too oft misused. Besides,                      345
  That summer, swarming as it did with thoughts
  Transient and idle, lacked not intervals
  When Folly from the frown of fleeting Time
  Shrunk, and the mind experienced in herself
  Conformity as just as that of old                                  350
  To the end and written spirit of God's works,
  Whether held forth in Nature or in Man,
  Through pregnant vision, separate or conjoined.

    When from our better selves we have too long
  Been parted by the hurrying world, and droop,                      355
  Sick of its business, of its pleasures tired,
  How gracious, how benign, is Solitude;
  How potent a mere image of her sway;
  Most potent when impressed upon the mind
  With an appropriate human centre--hermit,                          360
  Deep in the bosom of the wilderness;
  Votary (in vast cathedral, where no foot
  Is treading, where no other face is seen)
  Kneeling at prayers; or watchman on the top
  Of lighthouse, beaten by Atlantic waves;                           365
  Or as the soul of that great Power is met
  Sometimes embodied on a public road,
  When, for the night deserted, it assumes
  A character of quiet more profound
  Than pathless wastes.
                      Once, when those summer months                 370
  Were flown, and autumn brought its annual show
  Of oars with oars contending, sails with sails,
  Upon Winander's spacious breast, it chanced
  That--after I had left a flower-decked room
  (Whose in-door pastime, lighted up, survived                       375
  To a late hour), and spirits overwrought
  Were making night do penance for a day
  Spent in a round of strenuous idleness--[U]
  My homeward course led up a long ascent,
  Where the road's watery surface, to the top                        380
  Of that sharp rising, glittered to the moon
  And bore the semblance of another stream
  Stealing with silent lapse to join the brook
  That murmured in the vale. [V] All else was still;
  No living thing appeared in earth or air,                          385
  And, save the flowing water's peaceful voice,
  Sound there was none--but, lo! an uncouth shape,
  Shown by a sudden turning of the road,
  So near that, slipping back into the shade
  Of a thick hawthorn, I could mark him well,                        390
  Myself unseen. He was of stature tall,
  A span above man's common measure, tall,
  Stiff, lank, and upright; a more meagre man
  Was never seen before by night or day.
  Long were his arms, pallid his hands; his mouth                    395
  Looked ghastly in the moonlight: from behind,
  A mile-stone propped him; I could also ken
  That he was clothed in military garb,
  Though faded, yet entire. Companionless,
  No dog attending, by no staff sustained,                           400
  He stood, and in his very dress appeared
  A desolation, a simplicity,
  To which the trappings of a gaudy world
  Make a strange back-ground. From his lips, ere long,
  Issued low muttered sounds, as if of pain                          405
  Or some uneasy thought; yet still his form
  Kept the same awful steadiness--at his feet
  His shadow lay, and moved not. From self-blame
  Not wholly free, I watched him thus; at length
  Subduing my heart's specious cowardice,                            410
  I left the shady nook where I had stood
  And hailed him. Slowly from his resting-place
  He rose, and with a lean and wasted arm
  In measured gesture lifted to his head
  Returned my salutation; then resumed                               415
  His station as before; and when I asked
  His history, the veteran, in reply,
  Was neither slow nor eager; but, unmoved,
  And with a quiet uncomplaining voice,
  A stately air of mild indifference,                                420
  He told in few plain words a soldier's tale--
  That in the Tropic Islands he had served,
  Whence he had landed scarcely three weeks past:
  That on his landing he had been dismissed,
  And now was travelling towards his native home.                    425
  This heard, I said, in pity, "Come with me."
  He stooped, and straightway from the ground took up
  An oaken staff by me yet unobserved--
  A staff which must have dropt from his slack hand
  And lay till now neglected in the grass.                           430
  Though weak his step and cautious, he appeared
  To travel without pain, and I beheld,
  With an astonishment but ill suppressed,
  His ghostly figure moving at my side;
  Nor could I, while we journeyed thus, forbear                      435
  To turn from present hardships to the past,
  And speak of war, battle, and pestilence,
  Sprinkling this talk with questions, better spared,
  On what he might himself have seen or felt.
  He all the while was in demeanour calm,                            440
  Concise in answer; solemn and sublime
  He might have seemed, but that in all he said
  There was a strange half-absence, as of one
  Knowing too well the importance of his theme,
  But feeling it no longer. Our discourse                            445
  Soon ended, and together on we passed
  In silence through a wood gloomy and still.
  Up-turning, then, along an open field,
  We reached a cottage. At the door I knocked,
  And earnestly to charitable care                                   450
  Commended him as a poor friendless man,
  Belated and by sickness overcome.
  Assured that now the traveller would repose
  In comfort, I entreated that henceforth
  He would not linger in the public ways,                            455
  But ask for timely furtherance and help
  Such as his state required. At this reproof,
  With the same ghastly mildness in his look,
  He said, "My trust is in the God of Heaven,
  And in the eye of him who passes me!"                              460

    The cottage door was speedily unbarred,
  And now the soldier touched his hat once more
  With his lean hand, and in a faltering voice,
  Whose tone bespake reviving interests
  Till then unfelt, he thanked me; I returned                        465
  The farewell blessing of the patient man,
  And so we parted. Back I cast a look,
  And lingered near the door a little space,
  Then sought with quiet heart my distant home.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: On the road from Kendal to Windermere.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: At the Ferry below Bowness.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: From the Ferry over the ridge to Sawrey.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: The Vale of Esthwaite.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: Hawkshead Church; an old Norman structure, built in 1160,
the year of the foundation of Furness Abbey. It is no longer
"snow-white," a so-called Restoration having taken place within recent
years, on architectural principles. The plaster is stripped from the
outside of the church, which is now of a dull stone colour.

  "Apart from poetic sentiment," wrote Dr. Cradock (the late Principal
  of Brasenose College, Oxford), "it may be doubted whether the pale
  colour, still preserved at Grasmere and other churches in the
  district, does not better harmonize with the scenery and atmosphere of
  the Lake country.".

The most interesting feature in the interior is the private chapel of
Archbishop Sandys.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Hawkshead Church is a conspicuous object as you approach
the town, whether by the Ambleside road, or from Sawrey. It is the
latter approach that is here described.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: Anne Tyson,--Ed.]


[Footnote H: Anne Tyson seems to have removed from Hawkshead village to
Colthouse, on the opposite side of the Vale, and lived there for some
time before her death. Along with Dr. Cradock I examined the Parish
Registers of Hawkshead in the autumn of 1882, and we found the following
entry belonging to the year 1796.

  "Anne Tyson of Colthouse, widow, died May 25th buried 28th, in
  Churchyard, aged 83."

Her removal to Colthouse is confirmed, in a curious way, by a
reminiscence of William Wordsworth's (the poet's son), who told me that
if asked where the dame's house was, he would have pointed to a spot on
the eastern side of the valley, and out of the village altogether; his
father having taken him from Rydal Mount to Hawkshead when a mere boy,
and pointed out that spot. Doubtless Wordsworth took his son to the
cottage at Colthouse, where Anne Tyson died, as the earlier abode in
Hawkshead village is well known, and its site is indisputable.--Ed.]


[Footnote I: Compare book i. ll. 499-506, p. 148.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: There is no trace and no tradition at Hawkshead of the
"stone table under the dark pine," For a curious parallel to this

             'sunny seat
  Round the stone table under the dark pine,'

I am indebted to Dr. Cradock. He points out that in the prologue to
'Peter Bell', vol. ii p.9, we have the lines,

  'To the stone-table in my garden,
  Loved haunt of many a summer hour,'

Ed.]


[Footnote L: There can be little doubt as to the identity of "the famous
brook" "within our garden" boxed, which gives the name of Flag Street to
one of the alleys of Hawkshead.

  "Persons have visited the cottage," wrote Dr. Cradock, "without
  discovering it; and yet it is not forty yards distant, and is still
  exactly as described. On the opposite side of the lane leading to the
  cottage, and a few steps above it, is a narrow passage through some
  new stone buildings. On emerging from this, you meet a small garden,
  the farther side of which is bounded by the brook, confined on both
  sides by larger flags, and also covered by flags of the same Coniston
  formation, through the interstices of which you may see and hear the
  stream running freely. The upper flags are now used as a footpath, and
  lead by another passage back into the village. No doubt the garden has
  been reduced in size, by the use of that part of it fronting the lane
  for building purposes. The stream, before it enters the area of
  buildings and gardens, is open by the lane side, and seemingly comes
  from the hills to the westwards. The large flags are extremely hard
  and durable, and it is probably that the very flags which paved the
  channel in Wordsworth's time may still be doing the same duty."

The house adjoining this garden was not Dame Tyson's but a Mr. Watson's.
Possibly, however, some of the boys had free access to the latter, so
that Wordsworth could speak of it as "our garden;" or, Dame Tyson may
have rented it. See Note II. in the Appendix to this volume, p.
386.--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Not wholly so.--Ed.]


[Footnote N: See note  on preceding page.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: Compare the sonnet in vol. iv.:

  'Beloved Vale!' I said, 'when I shall con
  ...
  By doubts and thousand petty fancies crost.'

There can be little doubt that it is to the "famous brook" of 'The
Prelude' that reference is made in the later sonnet, and still more
significantly in the earlier poem 'The Fountain', vol. ii. p. 91.
Compare the MS. variants of that poem, printed as footnotes, from Lord
Coleridge's copy of the Poems:

  'Down to the vale with eager speed
  Behold this streamlet run,
  From subterranean bondage freed,
  And glittering in the sun.'

with the lines in 'The Prelude':

  'The famous brook, who, soon as he was boxed
  Within our garden, found himself at once,
  ...
  Stripped of his voice and left to dimple down, etc.'

This is doubtless the streamlet called Town Beck; and it is perhaps the
most interesting of all the spots alluded to by Wordsworth which can be
traced out in the Hawkshead district, I am indebted to Mr. Rawnsley for
the following note:

  "From the village, nay, from the poet's very door when he lived at
  Anne Tyson's, a good path leads on, past the vicarage, quite to its
  upland place of birth. It has eaten its way deeply into the soil; in
  one place there is a series of still pools, that overflow and fall
  into others, with quiet sound; at other spots, it is bustling and
  busy. Fine timber is found on either side of it, the roots of the
  trees often laid bare by the passing current. In one or two places by
  the side of this beck, and beneath the shadow of lofty oaks, may be
  found boulder stones, grey and moss-covered. Birds make hiding-places
  for themselves in these oak and hazel bushes by the stream. Following
  it up, we find it receives, at a tiny ford, the tribute of another
  stream from the north-west, and comes down between the adjacent hills
  (well wooded to the summit) from meadows of short-cropped grass, and
  to these from the open moorland, where it takes its rise. Every
  conceivable variety of beauty of sound and sight in streamlet life is
  found as we follow the course of this Town Beck. We owe much of
  Wordsworth's intimate acquaintance with streamlet beauty to it."

Compare 'The Fountain' in detail with this passage in 'The Prelude'.--Ed.]


[Footnote P: So it is in the editions of 1850 and 1857; but it should
evidently be "nor, dear Friend!"--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: The ash tree is gone, but there is no doubt as to the place
where it grew. Mr. Watson, whose father owned and inhabited the house
immediately opposite to Mrs. Tyson's cottage in Wordsworth's time (see a
previous note), told me that a tall ash tree grew on the proper right
front of the cottage, where an outhouse is now built. If this be so,
Wordsworth's bedroom must have been that on the proper left, with the
smaller of the two windows. The cottage faces nearly south-west. In the
upper flat there are two bedrooms to the front, with oak flooring, one
of which must have been Wordsworth's. See Note II. (p. 386) in Appendix
to this volume.--Ed.]


[Footnote R: In one of the small mountain farm-houses near
Hawkshead.--Ed.]


[Footnote S: Compare 'Paradise Lost', book viii. l. 528:

  'Walks, and the melody of birds.'

Ed.]


[Footnote T: Dr. Cradock has suggested to me the probable course of that
morning walk.

  "All that can be safely said as to the course of that memorable
  morning walk is that, in that neighbourhood, a view of the sea can
  only be obtained at a considerable elevation; also that if the words
  'in _front_ the sea lay laughing' are to be taken as rigidly exact,
  the poet's progress towards Hawkshead must have been in a direction
  mainly southerly, and therefore from the country north of that place.
  These and all other conditions of the description are answered in
  several parts of the range of hills lying between Elterwater and
  Hawkshead."

See Appendix, Note III. p. 389.--Ed.]


[Footnote U: Compare the sixth line of the poem, beginning

  'This Lawn, a carpet all alive.'

(1829.) And Horace, 'Epistolae', lib. i. ep. xi. l. 28:

  'Strenua nos exercet inertia.'

Ed.]


[Footnote V: The "brook" is Sawrey beck, and the "long ascent" is the
second of the two, in crossing from Windermere to Hawkshead, and going
over the ridge between the two Sawreys. It is only at that point that a
brook can be heard "murmuring in the vale." The road is the old one,
above the ferry, marked in the Ordnance Survey Map, by the Briers, not
the new road which makes a curve to the south, and cannot be described
as a "sharp rising."--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK FIFTH


BOOKS


  When Contemplation, like the night-calm felt
  Through earth and sky, spreads widely, and sends deep
  Into the soul its tranquillising power,
  Even then I sometimes grieve for thee, O Man,
  Earth's paramount Creature! not so much for woes                     5
  That thou endurest; heavy though that weight be,
  Cloud-like it mounts, or touched with light divine
  Doth melt away; but for those palms achieved,
  Through length of time, by patient exercise
  Of study and hard thought; there, there, it is                      10
  That sadness finds its fuel. Hitherto,
  In progress through this Verse, my mind hath looked
  Upon the speaking face of earth and heaven
  As her prime teacher, intercourse with man
  Established by the sovereign Intellect,                             15
  Who through that bodily image hath diffused,
  As might appear to the eye of fleeting time,
  A deathless spirit. Thou also, man! hast wrought,
  For commerce of thy nature with herself,
  Things that aspire to unconquerable life;                           20
  And yet we feel--we cannot choose but feel--
  That they must perish. Tremblings of the heart
  It gives, to think that our immortal being
  No more shall need such garments; and yet man,
  As long as he shall be the child of earth,                          25
  Might almost "weep to have" [A] what he may lose,
  Nor be himself extinguished, but survive,
  Abject, depressed, forlorn, disconsolate.
  A thought is with me sometimes, and I say,--
  Should the whole frame of earth by inward throes                    30
  Be wrenched, or fire come down from far to scorch
  Her pleasant habitations, and dry up
  Old Ocean, in his bed left singed and bare,
  Yet would the living Presence still subsist
  Victorious, and composure would ensue,                              35
  And kindlings like the morning--presage sure
  Of day returning and of life revived. [B]
  But all the meditations of mankind,
  Yea, all the adamantine holds of truth
  By reason built, or passion, which itself                           40
  Is highest reason in a soul sublime;
  The consecrated works of Bard and Sage,
  Sensuous or intellectual, wrought by men,
  Twin labourers and heirs of the same hopes;
  Where would they be? Oh! why hath not the Mind                      45
  Some element to stamp her image on
  In nature somewhat nearer to her own? [C]
  Why, gifted with such powers to send abroad
  Her spirit, must it lodge in shrines so frail?

    One day, when from my lips a like complaint                       50
  Had fallen in presence of a studious friend,
  He with a smile made answer, that in truth
  'Twas going far to seek disquietude;
  But on the front of his reproof confessed
  That he himself had oftentimes given way                            55
  To kindred hauntings. Whereupon I told,
  That once in the stillness of a summer's noon,
  While I was seated in a rocky cave
  By the sea-side, perusing, so it chanced,
  The famous history of the errant knight                             60
  Recorded by Cervantes, these same thoughts
  Beset me, and to height unusual rose,
  While listlessly I sate, and, having closed
  The book, had turned my eyes toward the wide sea.
  On poetry and geometric truth,                                      65
  And their high privilege of lasting life,
  From all internal injury exempt,
  I mused, upon these chiefly: and at length,
  My senses yielding to the sultry air,
  Sleep seized me, and I passed into a dream.                         70
  I saw before me stretched a boundless plain
  Of sandy wilderness, all black and void,
  And as I looked around, distress and fear
  Came creeping over me, when at my side,
  Close at my side, an uncouth shape appeared                         75
  Upon a dromedary, mounted high.
  He seemed an Arab of the Bedouin tribes:
  A lance he bore, and underneath one arm
  A stone, and in the opposite hand a shell
  Of a surpassing brightness. At the sight                            80
  Much I rejoiced, not doubting but a guide
  Was present, one who with unerring skill
  Would through the desert lead me; and while yet
  I looked and looked, self-questioned what this freight
  Which the new-comer carried through the waste                       85
  Could mean, the Arab told me that the stone
  (To give it in the language of the dream)
  Was "Euclid's Elements;" and "This," said he,
  "Is something of more worth;" and at the word
  Stretched forth the shell, so beautiful in shape,                   90
  In colour so resplendent, with command
  That I should hold it to my ear. I did so,
  And heard that instant in an unknown tongue,
  Which yet I understood, articulate sounds,
  A loud prophetic blast of harmony;                                  95
  An Ode, in passion uttered, which foretold
  Destruction to the children of the earth
  By deluge, now at hand. No sooner ceased
  The song, than the Arab with calm look declared
  That all would come to pass of which the voice                     100
  Had given forewarning, and that he himself
  Was going then to bury those two books:
  The one that held acquaintance with the stars,
  And wedded soul to soul in purest bond
  Of reason, undisturbed by space or time;                           105
  The other that was a god, yea many gods,
  Had voices more than all the winds, with power
  To exhilarate the spirit, and to soothe,
  Through every clime, the heart of human kind.
  While this was uttering, strange as it may seem,                   110
  I wondered not, although I plainly saw
  The one to be a stone, the other a shell;
  Nor doubted once but that they both were books,
  Having a perfect faith in all that passed.
  Far stronger, now, grew the desire I felt                          115
  To cleave unto this man; but when I prayed
  To share his enterprise, he hurried on
  Reckless of me: I followed, not unseen,
  For oftentimes he cast a backward look,
  Grasping his twofold treasure.--Lance in rest,                     120
  He rode, I keeping pace with him; and now
  He, to my fancy, had become the knight
  Whose tale Cervantes tells; yet not the knight,
  But was an Arab of the desert too;
  Of these was neither, and was both at once.                        125
  His countenance, meanwhile, grew more disturbed;
  And, looking backwards when he looked, mine eyes
  Saw, over half the wilderness diffused,
  A bed of glittering light: I asked the cause:
  "It is," said he, "the waters of the deep                          130
  Gathering upon us;" quickening then the pace
  Of the unwieldy creature he bestrode,
  He left me: I called after him aloud;
  He heeded not; but, with his twofold charge
  Still in his grasp, before me, full in view,                       135
  Went hurrying o'er the illimitable waste,
  With the fleet waters of a drowning world
  In chase of him; whereat I waked in terror,
  And saw the sea before me, and the book,
  In which I had been reading, at my side. [D]                       140

    Full often, taking from the world of sleep
  This Arab phantom, which I thus beheld,
  This semi-Quixote, I to him have given
  A substance, fancied him a living man,
  A gentle dweller in the desert, crazed                             145
  By love and feeling, and internal thought
  Protracted among endless solitudes;
  Have shaped him wandering upon this quest!
  Nor have I pitied him; but rather felt
  Reverence was due to a being thus employed;                        150
  And thought that, in the blind and awful lair
  Of such a madness, reason did lie couched.
  Enow there are on earth to take in charge
  Their wives, their children, and their virgin loves,
  Or whatsoever else the heart holds dear;                           155
  Enow to stir for these; yea, will I say,
  Contemplating in soberness the approach
  Of an event so dire, by signs in earth
  Or heaven made manifest, that I could share
  That maniac's fond anxiety, and go                                 160
  Upon like errand. Oftentimes at least
  Me hath such strong enhancement overcome,
  When I have held a volume in my hand,
  Poor earthly casket of immortal verse,
  Shakespeare, or Milton, labourers divine!                          165

    Great and benign, indeed, must be the power
  Of living nature, which could thus so long
  Detain me from the best of other guides
  And dearest helpers, left unthanked, unpraised,
  Even in the time of lisping infancy;                               170
  And later down, in prattling childhood even,
  While I was travelling back among those days,
  How could I ever play an ingrate's part?
  Once more should I have made those bowers resound,
  By intermingling strains of thankfulness                           175
  With their own thoughtless melodies; at least
  It might have well beseemed me to repeat
  Some simply fashioned tale, to tell again,
  In slender accents of sweet verse, some tale
  That did bewitch me then, and soothes me now.                      180
  O Friend! O Poet! brother of my soul,
  Think not that I could pass along untouched
  By these remembrances. Yet wherefore speak?
  Why call upon a few weak words to say
  What is already written in the hearts                              185
  Of all that breathe?--what in the path of all
  Drops daily from the tongue of every child,
  Wherever man is found? The trickling tear
  Upon the cheek of listening Infancy
  Proclaims it, and the insuperable look                             190
  That drinks as if it never could be full.

    That portion of my story I shall leave
  There registered: whatever else of power
  Or pleasure sown, or fostered thus, may be
  Peculiar to myself, let that remain                                195
  Where still it works, though hidden from all search
  Among the depths of time. Yet is it just
  That here, in memory of all books which lay
  Their sure foundations in the heart of man,
  Whether by native prose, or numerous verse, [E]                    200
  That in the name of all inspired souls--
  From Homer the great Thunderer, from the voice
  That roars along the bed of Jewish song,
  And that more varied and elaborate,
  Those trumpet-tones of harmony that shake                          205
  Our shores in England,--from those loftiest notes
  Down to the low and wren-like warblings, made
  For cottagers and spinners at the wheel,
  And sun-burnt travellers resting their tired limbs,
  Stretched under wayside hedge-rows, ballad tunes,                  210
  Food for the hungry ears of little ones,
  And of old men who have survived their joys--
  'Tis just that in behalf of these, the works,
  And of the men that framed them, whether known,
  Or sleeping nameless in their scattered graves,                    215
  That I should here assert their rights, attest
  Their honours, and should, once for all, pronounce
  Their benediction; speak of them as Powers
  For ever to be hallowed; only less,
  For what we are and what we may become,                            220
  Than Nature's self, which is the breath of God,
  Or His pure Word by miracle revealed.

    Rarely and with reluctance would I stoop
  To transitory themes; yet I rejoice,
  And, by these thoughts admonished, will pour out                   225
  Thanks with uplifted heart, that I was reared
  Safe from an evil which these days have laid
  Upon the children of the land, a pest
  That might have dried me up, body and soul.
  This verse is dedicate to Nature's self,                           230
  And things that teach as Nature teaches: then,
  Oh! where had been the Man, the Poet where,
  Where had we been, we two, beloved Friend!
  If in the season of unperilous choice,
  In lieu of wandering, as we did, through vales                     235
  Rich with indigenous produce, open ground
  Of Fancy, happy pastures ranged at will,
  We had been followed, hourly watched, and noosed,
  Each in his several melancholy walk
  Stringed like a poor man's heifer at its feed,                     240
  Led through the lanes in forlorn servitude;
  Or rather like a stalled ox debarred
  From touch of growing grass, that may not taste
  A flower till it have yielded up its sweets
  A prelibation to the mower's scythe. [F]                           245

    Behold the parent hen amid her brood,
  Though fledged and feathered, and well pleased to part
  And straggle from her presence, still a brood,
  And she herself from the maternal bond
  Still undischarged; yet doth she little more                       250
  Than move with them in tenderness and love,
  A centre to the circle which they make;
  And now and then, alike from need of theirs
  And call of her own natural appetites,
  She scratches, ransacks up the earth for food,                     255
  Which they partake at pleasure. Early died
  My honoured Mother, she who was the heart
  And hinge of all our learnings and our loves: [G]
  She left us destitute, and, as we might,
  Trooping together. Little suits it me                              260
  To break upon the sabbath of her rest
  With any thought that looks at others' blame;
  Nor would I praise her but in perfect love.
  Hence am I checked: but let me boldly say,
  In gratitude, and for the sake of truth,                           265
  Unheard by her, that she, not falsely taught,
  Fetching her goodness rather from times past,
  Than shaping novelties for times to come,
  Had no presumption, no such jealousy,
  Nor did by habit of her thoughts mistrust                          270
  Our nature, but had virtual faith that He
  Who fills the mother's breast with innocent milk,
  Doth also for our nobler part provide,
  Under His great correction and control,
  As innocent instincts, and as innocent food;                       275
  Or draws for minds that are left free to trust
  In the simplicities of opening life
  Sweet honey out of spurned or dreaded weeds.
  This was her creed, and therefore she was pure
  From anxious fear of error or mishap,                              280
  And evil, overweeningly so called;
  Was not puffed up by false unnatural hopes,
  Nor selfish with unnecessary cares,
  Nor with impatience from the season asked
  More than its timely produce; rather loved                         285
  The hours for what they are, than from regard
  Glanced on their promises in restless pride.
  Such was she--not from faculties more strong
  Than others have, but from the times, perhaps,
  And spot in which she lived, and through a grace                   290
  Of modest meekness, simple-mindedness,
  A heart that found benignity and hope,
  Being itself benign.
                                     My drift I fear
  Is scarcely obvious; but, that common sense
  May try this modern system by its fruits,                          295
  Leave let me take to place before her sight
  A specimen pourtrayed with faithful hand.
  Full early trained to worship seemliness,
  This model of a child is never known
  To mix in quarrels; that were far beneath                          300
  Its dignity; with gifts he bubbles o'er
  As generous as a fountain; selfishness
  May not come near him, nor the little throng
  Of flitting pleasures tempt him from his path;
  The wandering beggars propagate his name,                          305
  Dumb creatures find him tender as a nun,
  And natural or supernatural fear,
  Unless it leap upon him in a dream,
  Touches him not. To enhance the wonder, see
  How arch his notices, how nice his sense                           310
  Of the ridiculous; not blind is he
  To the broad follies of the licensed world,
  Yet innocent himself withal, though shrewd,
  And can read lectures upon innocence;
  A miracle of scientific lore,                                      315
  Ships he can guide across the pathless sea,
  And tell you all their cunning; he can read
  The inside of the earth, and spell the stars;
  He knows the policies of foreign lands;
  Can string you names of districts, cities, towns,                  320
  The whole world over, tight as beads of dew
  Upon a gossamer thread; he sifts, he weighs;
  All things are put to question; he must live
  Knowing that he grows wiser every day
  Or else not live at all, and seeing too                            325
  Each little drop of wisdom as it falls
  Into the dimpling cistern of his heart:
  For this unnatural growth the trainer blame,
  Pity the tree.--Poor human vanity,
  Wert thou extinguished, little would be left                       330
  Which he could truly love; but how escape?
  For, ever as a thought of purer, birth
  Rises to lead him toward a better clime,
  Some intermeddler still is on the watch
  To drive him back, and pound him, like a stray,                    335
  Within the pinfold of his own conceit.
  Meanwhile old grandame earth is grieved to find
  The playthings, which her love designed for him,
  Unthought of: in their woodland beds the flowers
  Weep, and the river sides are all forlorn.                         340
  Oh! give us once again the wishing cap
  Of Fortunatus, and the invisible coat
  Of Jack the Giant-killer, Robin Hood,
  And Sabra in the forest with St. George!
  The child, whose love is here, at least, doth reap                 345
  One precious gain, that he forgets himself.

    These mighty workmen of our later age,
  Who, with a broad highway, have overbridged
  The froward chaos of futurity,
  Tamed to their bidding; they who have the skill                    350
  To manage books, and things, and make them act
  On infant minds as surely as the sun
  Deals with a flower; the keepers of our time,
  The guides and wardens of our faculties,
  Sages who in their prescience would control                        355
  All accidents, and to the very road
  Which they have fashioned would confine us down,
  Like engines; when will their presumption learn,
  That in the unreasoning progress of the world
  A wiser spirit is at work for us,                                  360
  A better eye than theirs, most prodigal
  Of blessings, and most studious of our good,
  Even in what seem our most unfruitful hours? [H]

  There was a Boy: ye knew him well, ye cliffs
  And islands of Winander!--many a time                              365
  At evening, when the earliest stars began
  To move along the edges of the hills,
  Rising or setting, would he stand alone
  Beneath the trees or by the glimmering lake,
  And there, with fingers interwoven, both hands                     370
  Pressed closely palm to palm, and to his mouth
  Uplifted, he, as through an instrument,
  Blew mimic hootings to the silent owls,
  That they might answer him [I]; and they would shout
  Across the watery vale, and shout again,                           375
  Responsive to his call, with quivering peals,
  And long halloos and screams, and echoes loud,
  Redoubled and redoubled, concourse wild
  Of jocund din; and, when a lengthened pause
  Of silence came and baffled his best skill,                        380
  Then sometimes, in that silence while he hung
  Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise
  Has carried far into his heart the voice
  Of mountain torrents; or the visible scene
  Would enter unawares into his mind,                                385
  With all its solemn imagery, its rocks,
  Its woods, and that uncertain heaven, received
  Into the bosom of the steady lake.

  This Boy was taken from his mates, and died
  In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old.                    390
  Fair is the spot, most beautiful the vale
  Where he was born; the grassy churchyard hangs
  Upon a slope above the village school, [K]
  And through that churchyard when my way has led
  On summer evenings, I believe that there                           395
  A long half hour together I have stood
  Mute, looking at the grave in which he lies! [L]
  Even now appears before the mind's clear eye
  That self-same village church; I see her sit
  (The throned Lady whom erewhile we hailed)                         400
  On her green hill, forgetful of this Boy
  Who slumbers at her feet,--forgetful, too,
  Of all her silent neighbourhood of graves,
  And listening only to the gladsome sounds
  That, from the rural school ascending, [M] play                    405
  Beneath her and about her. May she long
  Behold a race of young ones like to those
  With whom I herded!--(easily, indeed,
  We might have fed upon a fatter soil
  Of arts and letters--but be that forgiven)--410
  A race of real children; not too wise,
  Too learned, or too good; [N] but wanton, fresh,
  And bandied up and down by love and hate;
  Not unresentful where self-justified;
  Fierce, moody, patient, venturous, modest, shy;                    415
  Mad at their sports like withered leaves in winds;
  Though doing wrong and suffering, and full oft
  Bending beneath our life's mysterious weight
  Of pain, and doubt, and fear, yet yielding not
  In happiness to the happiest upon earth.                           420
  Simplicity in habit, truth in speech,
  Be these the daily strengtheners of their minds;
  May books and Nature be their early joy!
  And knowledge, rightly honoured with that name--
  Knowledge not purchased by the loss of power!                      425

    Well do I call to mind the very week
  When I was first intrusted to the care
  Of that sweet Valley; when its paths, its shores,
  And brooks [O] were like a dream of novelty
  To my half-infant thoughts; that very week,                        430
  While I was roving up and down alone,
  Seeking I knew not what, I chanced to cross
  One of those open fields, which, shaped like ears,
  Make green peninsulas on Esthwaite's Lake:
  Twilight was coming on, yet through the gloom                      435
  Appeared distinctly on the opposite shore
  A heap of garments, as if left by one
  Who might have there been bathing. Long I watched,
  But no one owned them; meanwhile the calm lake
  Grew dark with all the shadows on its breast,                      440
  And, now and then, a fish up-leaping snapped
  The breathless stillness. [P] The succeeding day,
  Those unclaimed garments telling a plain tale
  Drew to the spot an anxious crowd; some looked
  In passive expectation from the shore,                             445
  While from a boat others hung o'er the deep,
  Sounding with grappling irons and long poles.
  At last, the dead man, 'mid that beauteous scene
  Of trees and hills and water, bolt upright
  Rose, with his ghastly face, a spectre shape                       450
  Of terror; yet no soul-debasing fear,
  Young as I was, a child not nine years old,
  Possessed me, for my inner eye had seen
  Such sights before, among the shining streams
  Of faery land, the forest of romance.                              455
  Their spirit hallowed the sad spectacle
  With decoration of ideal grace;
  A dignity, a smoothness, like the works
  Of Grecian art, and purest poesy.

    A precious treasure had I long possessed,                        460
  A little yellow, canvas-covered book,
  A slender abstract of the Arabian tales;
  And, from companions in a new abode,
  When first I learnt, that this dear prize of mine
  Was but a block hewn from a mighty quarry--465
  That there were four large volumes, laden all
  With kindred matter, 'twas to me, in truth,
  A promise scarcely earthly. Instantly,
  With one not richer than myself, I made
  A covenant that each should lay aside                              470
  The moneys he possessed, and hoard up more,
  Till our joint savings had amassed enough
  To make this book our own. Through several months,
  In spite of all temptation, we preserved
  Religiously that vow; but firmness failed,                         475
  Nor were we ever masters of our wish.

    And when thereafter to my father's house
  The holidays returned me, there to find
  That golden store of books which I had left,
  What joy was mine! How often in the course                         480
  Of those glad respites, though a soft west wind
  Ruffled the waters to the angler's wish
  For a whole day together, have I lain
  Down by thy side, O Derwent! murmuring stream,
  On the hot stones, and in the glaring sun,                         485
  And there have read, devouring as I read,
  Defrauding the day's glory, desperate!
  Till with a sudden bound of smart reproach,
  Such as an idler deals with in his shame,
  I to the sport betook myself again.                                490

    A gracious spirit o'er this earth presides,
  And o'er the heart of man: invisibly
  It comes, to works of unreproved delight,
  And tendency benign, directing those
  Who care not, know not, think not what they do.                    495
  The tales that charm away the wakeful night
  In Araby, romances; legends penned
  For solace by dim light of monkish lamps;
  Fictions, for ladies of their love, devised
  By youthful squires; adventures endless, spun                      500
  By the dismantled warrior in old age,
  Out of the bowels of those very schemes
  In which his youth did first extravagate;
  These spread like day, and something in the shape
  Of these will live till man shall be no more.                      505
  Dumb yearnings, hidden appetites, are ours,
  And _they must_ have their food. Our childhood sits,
  Our simple childhood, sits upon a throne
  That hath more power than all the elements.
  I guess not what this tells of Being past,                         510
  Nor what it augurs of the life to come; [Q]
  But so it is, and, in that dubious hour,
  That twilight when we first begin to see
  This dawning earth, to recognise, expect,
  And in the long probation that ensues,                             515
  The time of trial, ere we learn to live
  In reconcilement with our stinted powers;
  To endure this state of meagre vassalage,
  Unwilling to forego, confess, submit,
  Uneasy and unsettled, yoke-fellows                                 520
  To custom, mettlesome, and not yet tamed
  And humbled down; oh! then we feel, we feel,
  We know where we have friends. Ye dreamers, then,
  Forgers of daring tales! we bless you then,
  Impostors, drivellers, dotards, as the ape                         525
  Philosophy will call you: _then_ we feel
  With what, and how great might ye are in league,
  Who make our wish, our power, our thought a deed,
  An empire, a possession,--ye whom time
  And seasons serve; all Faculties to whom                           530
  Earth crouches, the elements are potter's clay,
  Space like a heaven filled up with northern lights,
  Here, nowhere, there, and everywhere at once.

    Relinquishing this lofty eminence
  For ground, though humbler, not the less a tract                   535
  Of the same isthmus, which our spirits cross
  In progress from their native continent
  To earth and human life, the Song might dwell
  On that delightful time of growing youth,
  When craving for the marvellous gives way                          540
  To strengthening love for things that we have seen;
  When sober truth and steady sympathies,
  Offered to notice by less daring pens,
  Take firmer hold of us, and words themselves
  Move us with conscious pleasure.

                                   I am sad                          545
  At thought of raptures now for ever flown; [R]
  Almost to tears I sometimes could be sad
  To think of, to read over, many a page,
  Poems withal of name, which at that time
  Did never fail to entrance me, and are now                         550
  Dead in my eyes, dead as a theatre
  Fresh emptied of spectators. Twice five years
  Or less I might have seen, when first my mind
  With conscious pleasure opened to the charm
  Of words in tuneful order, found them sweet                        555
  For their own _sakes_, a passion, and a power;
  And phrases pleased me chosen for delight,
  For pomp, or love. Oft, in the public roads
  Yet unfrequented, while the morning light
  Was yellowing the hill tops, I went abroad                         560
  With a dear friend, [S] and for the better part
  Of two delightful hours we strolled along
  By the still borders of the misty lake, [T]
  Repeating favourite verses with one voice,
  Or conning more, as happy as the birds                             565
  That round us chaunted. Well might we be glad,
  Lifted above the ground by airy fancies,
  More bright than madness or the dreams of wine;
  And, though full oft the objects of our love
  Were false, and in their splendour overwrought, [U]                570
  Yet was there surely then no vulgar power
  Working within us,--nothing less, in truth,
  Than that most noble attribute of man,
  Though yet untutored and inordinate,
  That wish for something loftier, more adorned,                     575
  Than is the common aspect, daily garb,
  Of human life. What wonder, then, if sounds
  Of exultation echoed through the groves!
  For, images, and sentiments, and words,
  And everything encountered or pursued                              580
  In that delicious world of poesy,
  Kept holiday, a never-ending show,
  With music, incense, festival, and flowers!

    Here must we pause: this only let me add,
  From heart-experience, and in humblest sense                       585
  Of modesty, that he, who in his youth
  A daily wanderer among woods and fields
  With living Nature hath been intimate,
  Not only in that raw unpractised time
  Is stirred to extasy, as others are,                               590
  By glittering verse; but further, doth receive,
  In measure only dealt out to himself,
  Knowledge and increase of enduring joy
  From the great Nature that exists in works
  Of mighty Poets. Visionary power                                   595
  Attends the motions of the viewless winds,
  Embodied in the mystery of words:
  There, darkness makes abode, and all the host
  Of shadowy things work endless changes,--there,
  As in a mansion like their proper home,                            600
  Even forms and substances are circumfused
  By that transparent veil with light divine,
  And, through the turnings intricate of verse,
  Present themselves as objects recognised,
  In flashes, and with glory not their own.                          605


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This quotation I am unable to trace.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare Emily Bronte's statement of the same, in the last
verse she wrote:

    'Though Earth and Man were gone,
  And suns and universes ceased to be,
    And Thou wert left alone,
  Every existence would exist in Thee.

    There is not room for Death,
  Nor atom that His might could render void;
   Thou--THOU art Being and Breath,
  And what THOU art may never be destroyed.'

Ed.]


[Footnote C:

  "Because she would then become farther and farther removed from the
  source of essential life and being, diffused instead of concentrated."

(William Davies).--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Mr. A. J. Duffield, the translator of Don Quixote, wrote me
the following letter on Wordsworth and Cervantes, which I transcribe in
full.

  "So far as I can learn Wordsworth had not read any critical work on
  Don Quixote before he wrote the fifth book of 'The Prelude', [a] nor
  for that matter had any criticism of the master-piece of Cervantes
  then appeared. Yet Wordsworth,

                     'by patient exercise
    Of study and hard thought,'

  has given us not only a most poetical insight into the real nature of
  the 'Illustrious Hidalgo of La Mancha'; he has shown us that it was a
  nature compacted of the madman and the poet, and this in language so
  appropriate, that the consideration of it cannot fail to give pleasure
  to all who have found a reason for weighing Wordsworth's words.

  "He demands

           'Oh! why hath not the Mind
    Some element to stamp her image on?'

  then falls asleep, 'his senses yielding to the sultry air,' and he
  sees before him

                'stretched a boundless plain
    Of sandy wilderness, all black and void,
    And as I looked around, distress and fear
    Came creeping over me, when at my side,
    Close at my side, an uncouth shape appeared
    Upon a dromedary, mounted high.
    He seemed an Arab ...'

  Here we have the plains of Montiel, and the poet realising all that
  Don Quixote felt on that day of July, 'the hottest of the year,' when
  he first set out on his quest and met with nothing worth recording.

    'The uncouth shape'

  is of course the Don himself,

    the 'dromedary'

  is Rozinante, and

    the 'Arab'

  doubtless is Cid Hamete Benengeli.

  "Taking such an one for the guide,

             'who with unerring skill
    Would through the desert lead me,'

  is a most sweet play of humour like to the lambent flame of his whose
  satire was as a summer breath, and who smiled all the time he wrote,
  although he wrote chiefly in a prison.

    'The loud prophetic blast of harmony'

  is doubtless a continuation of this humour, down to the lines

    'Nor doubted once but that they both were books,
    Having a perfect faith in all that passed.'

  "Our poet now becomes positive,

                           'Lance in rest,
    He rode, I keeping pace with him; and now
    He, to my fancy, had become the knight
    Whose tale Cervantes tells; _yet not the knight
    But was an Arab of the desert too_,
    Of these was neither, and was both at once.'

  This is absolutely true, and was one of the earliest complaints made a
  century and a half ago, when Spaniards began to criticise their one
  great book. They could not tell at times whether Don Quixote was
  speaking, or Cervantes, or Cid Hamete Benengeli.

    'A bed of glittering light'

  is a delightful description of the attitude of Don Quixote's mind
  towards external nature while passing through the desert.

    'It is,' said he, 'the waters of the deep
    Gathering upon us.'

  "It was, of course, only the mirage; but this he changed to suit his
  own purpose into the 'waters of the deep,' as he changed the row of
  Castilian wind-mills into giants, and the roar of the fulling mills
  into the din of war.

  "Wordsworth is now awake from his dream, but turning all he saw in it
  into a reality, as only the poet can, he feels that

    'Reverence was due to a being thus employed;
    And thought that, _in the blind and awful lair
    Of such a madness, reason did lie couched._'

  Here again is a most profound description of the creation of
  Cervantes. Don Quixote was mad, but his was a madness that proceeded
  from that 'blind and awful lair,' a disordered stomach, rather than
  from an injured brain. Had Don Quixote not forsaken the exercise of
  the chase and early rising, if he had not taken to eating chestnuts at
  night, cold spiced meat, together with onions and 'ollas podridas',
  then proceeding to read exciting, unnatural tales of love and war, he
  would not have gone mad.

  "But his reason only lay 'couched,' not overthrown. Only give him a
  dose of the balsam of Fierabras, his reason shall spring out of its
  lair, like a lion from out its hiding-place, as indeed it did; and you
  then have that wonderful piece of rhetoric, which describes the army
  of Alifanfaron in the eighteenth chapter, Part I.

  "There are many other things worthy of note, such as

                               'crazed
    By love and feeling, and internal thought
    Protracted among endless solitudes,'

  all of which are 'fit epithets blessed in the marriage of pure words,'
  which the author of 'The Prelude', without any special learning, or
  personal knowledge of Spain, has given us, and are so striking as to
  compel us once again to go to Wordsworth and say, 'we do not all
  understand thee yet, not all that thou hast given us.'

  Very truly yours, A. J. Duffield."

Ed.]


[Footnote E: Compare 'Paradise Lost', v. 1. 150:

  'In prose or numerous verse.'

Ed.]


[Footnote F: Wordsworth's earliest teachers, before he was sent to
Hawkshead School, were his mother and the Rev. Mr. Gilbanks at
Cockermouth, and Mrs. Anne Birkett at Penrith. His mother and Dame
Birkett taught him to read, and trained his infant memory. Mr. Gilbanks
also gave him elementary instruction; while his father made him commit
to memory portions of the English poets. At Hawkshead he read English
literature, learned Latin and Mathematics, and wrote both English and
Latin verse. There was little or no method, and no mechanical or
artificial drill in his early education. Though he was taught both
languages and mathematics he was left as free to range the "happy
pastures" of literature, as to range the Hawkshead woods on autumn
nights in pursuit of woodcocks. It is likely that the reference in the
above passage is to his education both in childhood and in youth,
although specially to the former. In his 'Autobiographical Memoranda',
Wordsworth says,

  "Of my earliest days at School I have little to say, but that they
  were very happy ones, chiefly because I was left at liberty, then and
  in the vacations, to read whatever books I liked. For example, I read
  all Fielding's works, 'Don Quixote',  'Gil Blas', and any part of
  Swift that I liked; 'Gulliver's Travels' and the 'Tale of a Tub' being
  both much to my taste."

As Wordsworth alludes to Coleridge's education, along with his own, "in
the season of unperilous choice," the reference is probably to
Coleridge's early time at the vicarage of Ottery St. Mary's, Devonshire,
and at the Grammar School there, as well as at Christ's Hospital in
London, where (with Charles Lamb as school-companion) he was as
enthusiastic in his exploits in the New River, as he was an eager
student of books.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: Mrs. Wordsworth died at Penrith, in the year 1778, the
poet's eighth year.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: Compare, in 'Expostulation and Reply' (vol. i. p. 273),

  'Think you, 'mid all this mighty sum
  Of things for ever speaking,
  That nothing of itself will come,
  But we must still be seeking?'

Ed.]


[Footnote I: See the Fenwick note to the poem, 'There was a Boy', vol.
ii. p. 57, and Wordsworth's reference to his schoolfellow William
Raincock.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: Hawkshead Grammar School.--Ed.]


[Footnote L: Lines 364-97 were first published in "Lyrical Ballads,"
1800, and appeared in all the subsequent collective editions of the
poems, standing first in the group of "Poems of the Imagination."

The grave of this "immortal boy" cannot be identified. His name, and
everything about him except what is here recorded, is unknown; but he
was, in all likelihood, a school companion of Wordsworth's at Hawkshead.

  'And through that churchyard when my way has led
  On summer evenings.'

One may localize the above description almost anywhere at
Hawkshead--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Hawkshead School, in which Wordsworth was taught for eight
years--from 1778 to 1786--was founded by Archbishop Sandys of York, in
1585, and the building is still very much as it was in Wordsworth's
time. The main school-room is on the ground floor. One small chamber on
the first floor was used, in the end of last century, by the head
master, as a private class-room, for teaching a few advanced pupils. In
another is a small library, formed in part by the donations of the
scholars; it having been a custom for each pupil to present a volume on
leaving the school, or to send one afterwards. Very probably one of the
volumes now in the library was presented by Wordsworth. There are
several which were presented by his school-fellows, during the years in
which Wordsworth was at Hawkshead. The master, in 1877, promised me that
he would search through his somewhat musty treasures, to see if he could
discover a book with the poet's autograph; but I never heard of his
success. On the wall of the room containing the library is a tablet,
recording the names of several masters. There also, in an old oak chest,
is kept the original charter of the school. The oak benches downstairs
are covered with the names or initials of the boys, deeply cut; and,
amongst them, the name of William Wordsworth--but not those of his
brothers Richard, John, or Christopher--may be seen. For further details
as to the Hawkshead School, see the 'Life' of the Poet in this edition.
Towards the close of last century, when Wordsworth and his three
brothers were educated there, the school was one of the best educational
institutions in the north of England.--Ed.]


[Footnote N: Compare in the lines beginning "She was a Phantom of
delight" p. 2:

  'Creature not too bright or good
  For human nature's daily food.'

Ed.]


[Footnote O: Compare book iv. ll. 50 and 383, with relative notes--Ed.]


[Footnote P: Compare in 'Fidelity', p. 45:

  'There sometimes doth a leaping fish
  Send through the tarn a lonely cheer.'

Ed.]


[Footnote Q: Compare the 'Ode, Intimations of Immortality', stanza
v.--Ed.]


[Footnote R: Compare, in 'Tintern Abbey', vol. ii. p.54:

                      'That time is past,
  And all its aching joys are now no more,
  And all its dizzy raptures.'

And in the 'Ode, Intimations of Immortality', vol. viii.:

  'What though the radiance which was once so bright
  Be now for ever taken from my sight.'

Ed.]


[Footnote S: This friend of his boyhood, with whom Wordsworth spent
these "delightful hours," is as unknown as is the immortal Boy of
Windermere, who blew "mimic hootings to the silent owls," and who sleeps
in the churchyard "above the village school" of Hawkshead, and the Lucy
of the Goslar poems. Compare, however, p. 163. Wordsworth _may_ refer to
John Fleming of Rayrigg, with whom he used to take morning walks round
Esthwaite:

    '... five miles
  Of pleasant wandering ...'

Ed.]


[Footnote T: Esthwaite.--Ed.]


[Footnote U: Probably they were passages from Goldsmith, or Pope, or
writers of their school. The verses which he wrote upon the completion
of the second century of the foundation of the school were, as he
himself tells us, "a tame imitation of Pope's versification, and a
little in his style."--Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-FOOTNOTE ON THE TEXT

[Sub-Footnote a: Wordsworth studied Spanish during the winter he spent
at Orleans (1792). Don Quixote was one of the books he had read when at
the Hawkshead school.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK SIXTH


CAMBRIDGE AND THE ALPS


  The leaves were fading when to Esthwaite's banks
  And the simplicities of cottage life
  I bade farewell; and, one among the youth
  Who, summoned by that season, reunite
  As scattered birds troop to the fowler's lure,                       5
  Went back to Granta's cloisters, [A] not so prompt
  Or eager, though as gay and undepressed
  In mind, as when I thence had taken flight
  A few short months before. I turned my face
  Without repining from the coves and heights                         10
  Clothed in the sunshine of the withering fern; [B]
  Quitted, not both, the mild magnificence
  Of calmer lakes and louder streams; and you,
  Frank-hearted maids of rocky Cumberland,
  You and your not unwelcome days of mirth,                           15
  Relinquished, and your nights of revelry,
  And in my own unlovely cell sate down
  In lightsome mood--such privilege has youth
  That cannot take long leave of pleasant thoughts.
  The bonds of indolent society                                       20
  Relaxing in their hold, henceforth I lived
  More to myself. Two winters may be passed
  Without a separate notice: many books
  Were skimmed, devoured, or studiously perused,
  But with no settled plan. [C] I was detached                        25
  Internally from academic cares;
  Yet independent study seemed a course
  Of hardy disobedience toward friends
  And kindred, proud rebellion and unkind.
  This spurious virtue, rather let it bear                            30
  A name it now deserves, this cowardice,
  Gave treacherous sanction to that over-love
  Of freedom which encouraged me to turn
  From regulations even of my own
  As from restraints and bonds. Yet who can tell--35
  Who knows what thus may have been gained, both then
  And at a later season, or preserved;
  What love of nature, what original strength
  Of contemplation, what intuitive truths,
  The deepest and the best, what keen research,                       40
  Unbiassed, unbewildered, and unawed?

  The Poet's soul was with me at that time;
  Sweet meditations, the still overflow
  Of present happiness, while future years
  Lacked not anticipations, tender dreams,                            45
  No few of which have since been realised;
  And some remain, hopes for my future life.
  Four years and thirty, told this very week, [D]
  Have I been now a sojourner on earth,
  By sorrow not unsmitten; yet for me                                 50
  Life's morning radiance hath not left the hills,
  Her dew is on the flowers. Those were the days
  Which also first emboldened me to trust
  With firmness, hitherto but lightly touched
  By such a daring thought, that I might leave                        55
  Some monument behind me which pure hearts
  Should reverence. The instinctive humbleness,
  Maintained even by the very name and thought
  Of printed books and authorship, began
  To melt away; and further, the dread awe                            60
  Of mighty names was softened down and seemed
  Approachable, admitting fellowship
  Of modest sympathy. Such aspect now,
  Though not familiarly, my mind put on,
  Content to observe, to achieve, and to enjoy.                       65

    All winter long, whenever free to choose,
  Did I by night frequent the College groves
  And tributary walks; the last, and oft
  The only one, who had been lingering there
  Through hours of silence, till the porter's bell,                   70
  A punctual follower on the stroke of nine,
  Rang with its blunt unceremonious voice,
  Inexorable summons! Lofty elms,
  Inviting shades of opportune recess,
  Bestowed composure on a neighbourhood                               75
  Unpeaceful in itself. A single tree
  With sinuous trunk, boughs exquisitely wreathed,
  Grew there; [E] an ash which Winter for himself
  Decked out with pride, and with outlandish grace:
  Up from the ground, and almost to the top,                          80
  The trunk and every master branch were green
  With clustering ivy, and the lightsome twigs
  And outer spray profusely tipped with seeds
  That hung in yellow tassels, while the air
  Stirred them, not voiceless. Often have I stood                     85
  Foot-bound uplooking at this lovely tree
  Beneath a frosty moon. The hemisphere
  Of magic fiction, verse of mine perchance
  May never tread; but scarcely Spenser's self
  Could have more tranquil visions in his youth,                      90
  Or could more bright appearances create
  Of human forms with superhuman powers,
  Than I beheld loitering on calm clear nights
  Alone, beneath this fairy work of earth.

    On the vague reading of a truant youth [F]                        95
  'Twere idle to descant. My inner judgment
  Not seldom differed from my taste in books.
  As if it appertained to another mind,
  And yet the books which then I valued most
  Are dearest to me _now_; for, having scanned,                      100
  Not heedlessly, the laws, and watched the forms
  Of Nature, in that knowledge I possessed
  A standard, often usefully applied,
  Even when unconsciously, to things removed
  From a familiar sympathy.--In fine,                                105
  I was a better judge of thoughts than words,
  Misled in estimating words, not only
  By common inexperience of youth,
  But by the trade in classic niceties,
  The dangerous craft of culling term and phrase                     110
  From languages that want the living voice
  To carry meaning to the natural heart;
  To tell us what is passion, what is truth,
  What reason, what simplicity and sense.

    Yet may we not entirely overlook                                 115
  The pleasure gathered from the rudiments
  Of geometric science. Though advanced
  In these inquiries, with regret I speak,
  No farther than the threshold, [G] there I found
  Both elevation and composed delight:                               120
  With Indian awe and wonder, ignorance pleased
  With its own struggles, did I meditate
  On the relation those abstractions bear
  To Nature's laws, and by what process led,
  Those immaterial agents bowed their heads                          125
  Duly to serve the mind of earth-born man;
  From star to star, from kindred sphere to sphere,
  From system on to system without end.

    More frequently from the same source I drew
  A pleasure quiet and profound, a sense                             130
  Of permanent and universal sway,
  And paramount belief; there, recognised
  A type, for finite natures, of the one
  Supreme Existence, the surpassing life
  Which--to the boundaries of space and time,                        135
  Of melancholy space and doleful time,
  Superior, and incapable of change,
  Nor touched by welterings of passion--is,
  And hath the name of, God. Transcendent peace
  And silence did await upon these thoughts                          140
  That were a frequent comfort to my youth.

    'Tis told by one whom stormy waters threw,
  With fellow-sufferers by the shipwreck spared,
  Upon a desert coast, that having brought
  To land a single volume, saved by chance,                          145
  A treatise of Geometry, he wont,
  Although of food and clothing destitute,
  And beyond common wretchedness depressed,
  To part from company and take this book
  (Then first a self-taught pupil in its truths)                     150
  To spots remote, and draw his diagrams
  With a long staff upon the sand, and thus
  Did oft beguile his sorrow, and almost
  Forget his feeling: so (if like effect
  From the same cause produced, 'mid outward things                  155
  So different, may rightly be compared),
  So was it then with me, and so will be
  With Poets ever. Mighty is the charm
  Of those abstractions to a mind beset
  With images, and haunted by herself,                               160
  And specially delightful unto me
  Was that clear synthesis built up aloft
  So gracefully; even then when it appeared
  Not more than a mere plaything, or a toy
  To sense embodied: not the thing it is                             165
  In verity, an independent world,
  Created out of pure intelligence.

    Such dispositions then were mine unearned
  By aught, I fear, of genuine desert--
  Mine, through heaven's grace and inborn aptitudes.                 170
  And not to leave the story of that time
  Imperfect, with these habits must be joined,
  Moods melancholy, fits of spleen, that loved
  A pensive sky, sad days, and piping winds,
  The twilight more than dawn, autumn than spring; [H]               175
  A treasured and luxurious gloom of choice
  And inclination mainly, and the mere
  Redundancy of youth's contentedness.
--To time thus spent, add multitudes of hours
  Pilfered away, by what the Bard who sang                           180
  Of the Enchanter Indolence hath called
  "Good-natured lounging," [I] and behold a map
  Of my collegiate life--far less intense
  Than duty called for, or, without regard
  To duty, _might_ have sprung up of itself                          185
  By change of accidents, or even, to speak
  Without unkindness, in another place.
  Yet why take refuge in that plea?--the fault,
  This I repeat, was mine; mine be the blame.

    In summer, making quest for works of art,                        190
  Or scenes renowned for beauty, I explored
  That streamlet whose blue current works its way
  Between romantic Dovedale's spiry rocks; [K]
  Pried into Yorkshire dales, [L] or hidden tracts
  Of my own native region, and was blest                             195
  Between these sundry wanderings with a joy
  Above all joys, that seemed another morn
  Risen on mid noon; [M] blest with the presence, Friend!
  Of that sole Sister, her who hath been long
  Dear to thee also, thy true friend and mine, [N]                   200
  Now, after separation desolate,
  Restored to me--such absence that she seemed
  A gift then first bestowed. [O] The varied banks
  Of Emont, hitherto unnamed in song, [P]
  And that monastic castle, 'mid tall trees,                         205
  Low-standing by the margin of the stream, [Q]
  A mansion visited (as fame reports)
  By Sidney, [R] where, in sight of our Helvellyn,
  Or stormy Cross-fell, snatches he might pen
  Of his Arcadia, by fraternal love                                  210
  Inspired;--that river and those mouldering towers
  Have seen us side by side, when, having clomb
  The darksome windings of a broken stair,
  And crept along a ridge of fractured wall,
  Not without trembling, we in safety looked                         215
  Forth, through some Gothic window's open space,
  And gathered with one mind a rich reward
  From the far-stretching landscape, by the light
  Of morning beautified, or purple eve;
  Or, not less pleased, lay on some turret's head,                   220
  Catching from tufts of grass and hare-bell flowers
  Their faintest whisper to the passing breeze,
  Given out while mid-day heat oppressed the plains.

    Another maid there was, [S] who also shed
  A gladness o'er that season, then to me,                           225
  By her exulting outside look of youth
  And placid under-countenance, first endeared;
  That other spirit, Coleridge! who is now
  So near to us, that meek confiding heart,
  So reverenced by us both. O'er paths and fields                    230
  In all that neighbourhood, through narrow lanes
  Of eglantine, and through the shady woods,
  And o'er the Border Beacon, and the waste [T]
  Of naked pools, and common crags that lay
  Exposed on the bare felt, were scattered love,                     235
  The spirit of pleasure, and youth's golden gleam.
  O Friend! we had not seen thee at that time,
  And yet a power is on me, and a strong
  Confusion, and I seem to plant thee there.
  Far art thou wandered now in search of health                      240
  And milder breezes,--melancholy lot! [U]
  But thou art with us, with us in the past,
  The present, with us in the times to come.
  There is no grief, no sorrow, no despair,
  No languor, no dejection, no dismay,                               245
  No absence scarcely can there be, for those
  Who love as we do. Speed thee well! divide
  With us thy pleasure; thy returning strength,
  Receive it daily as a joy of ours;
  Share with us thy fresh spirits, whether gift                      250
  Of gales Etesian or of tender thoughts. [V]

    I, too, have been a wanderer; but, alas!
  How different the fate of different men.
  Though mutually unknown, yea nursed and reared
  As if in several elements, we were framed                          255
  To bend at last to the same discipline,
  Predestined, if two beings ever were,
  To seek the same delights, and have one health,
  One happiness. Throughout this narrative,
  Else sooner ended, I have borne in mind                            260
  For whom it registers the birth, and marks the growth,
  Of gentleness, simplicity, and truth,
  And joyous loves, that hallow innocent days
  Of peace and self-command. Of rivers, fields,
  And groves I speak to thee, my Friend! to thee,                    265
  Who, yet a liveried schoolboy, in the depths
  Of the huge city, [W] on the leaded roof
  Of that wide edifice, [X] thy school and home,
  Wert used to lie and gaze upon the clouds
  Moving in heaven; or, of that pleasure tired,                      270
  To shut thine eyes, and by internal light
  See trees, and meadows, and thy native stream, [Y]
  Far distant, thus beheld from year to year
  Of a long exile. Nor could I forget,
  In this late portion of my argument,                               275
  That scarcely, as my term of pupilage
  Ceased, had I left those academic bowers
  When thou wert thither guided. [Z] From the heart
  Of London, and from cloisters there, thou camest,
  And didst sit down in temperance and peace,                        280
  A rigorous student. [a] What a stormy course
  Then followed. [b] Oh! it is a pang that calls
  For utterance, to think what easy change
  Of circumstances might to thee have spared
  A world of pain, ripened a thousand hopes,                         285
  For ever withered. Through this retrospect
  Of my collegiate life I still have had
  Thy after-sojourn in the self-same place
  Present before my eyes, have played with times
  And accidents as children do with cards,                           290
  Or as a man, who, when his house is built,
  A frame locked up in wood and stone, doth still,
  As impotent fancy prompts, by his fireside,
  Rebuild it to his liking. I have thought
  Of thee, thy learning, gorgeous eloquence,                         295
  And all the strength and plumage of thy youth,
  Thy subtle speculations, toils abstruse
  Among the schoolmen, and Platonic forms
  Of wild ideal pageantry, shaped out
  From things well-matched or ill, and words for things,             300
  The self-created sustenance of a mind
  Debarred from Nature's living images,
  Compelled to be a life unto herself,
  And unrelentingly possessed by thirst
  Of greatness, love, and beauty. Not alone,                         305
  Ah! surely not in singleness of heart
  Should I have seen the light of evening fade
  From smooth Cam's silent waters: had we met,
  Even at that early time, needs must I trust
  In the belief, that my maturer age,                                310
  My calmer habits, and more steady voice,
  Would with an influence benign have soothed,
  Or chased away, the airy wretchedness
  That battened on thy youth. But thou hast trod
  A march of glory, which doth put to shame                          315
  These vain regrets; health suffers in thee, else
  Such grief for thee would be the weakest thought
  That ever harboured in the breast of man.

    A passing word erewhile did lightly touch
  On wanderings of my own, that now embraced                         320
  With livelier hope a region wider far.

    When the third summer freed us from restraint,
  A youthful friend, he too a mountaineer, [c]
  Not slow to share my wishes, took his staff,
  And sallying forth, we journeyed side by side,                     325
  Bound to the distant Alps. [d] A hardy slight
  Did this unprecedented course imply
  Of college studies and their set rewards;
  Nor had, in truth, the scheme been formed by me
  Without uneasy forethought of the pain,                            330
  The censures, and ill-omening of those
  To whom my worldly interests were dear.
  But Nature then was sovereign in my mind,
  And mighty forms, seizing a youthful fancy,
  Had given a charter to irregular hopes.                            335
  In any age of uneventful calm
  Among the nations, surely would my heart
  Have been possessed by similar desire;
  But Europe at that time was thrilled with joy,
  France standing on the top of golden hours, [e]                    340
  And human nature seeming born again. [f]

    Lightly equipped, [g] and but a few brief looks
  Cast on the white cliffs of our native shore
  From the receding vessel's deck, we chanced
  To land at Calais on the very eve                                  345
  Of that great federal day; [h] and there we saw,
  In a mean city, and among a few,
  How bright a face is worn when joy of one
  Is joy for tens of millions. [h] Southward thence
  We held our way, direct through hamlets, towns, [i]                350
  Gaudy with reliques of that festival,
  Flowers left to wither on triumphal arcs,
  And window-garlands. On the public roads,
  And, once, three days successively, through paths
  By which our toilsome journey was abridged, [k]                    355
  Among sequestered villages we walked
  And found benevolence and blessedness
  Spread like a fragrance everywhere, when spring
  Hath left no corner of the land untouched:
  Where elms for many and many a league in files                     360
  With their thin umbrage, on the stately roads
  Of that great kingdom, rustled o'er our heads, [m]
  For ever near us as we paced along:
  How sweet at such a time, with such delight
  On every side, in prime of youthful strength,                      365
  To feed a Poet's tender melancholy
  And fond conceit of sadness, with the sound
  Of undulations varying as might please
  The wind that swayed them; once, and more than once,
  Unhoused beneath the evening star we saw                           370
  Dances of liberty, and, in late hours
  Of darkness, dances in the open air
  Deftly prolonged, though grey-haired lookers on
  Might waste their breath in chiding.
                                       Under hills--
  The vine-clad hills and slopes of Burgundy,                        375
  Upon the bosom of the gentle Saone
  We glided forward with the flowing stream, [n]
  Swift Rhone! thou wert the _wings_ on which we cut
  A winding passage with majestic ease
  Between thy lofty rocks. [o] Enchanting show                       380
  Those woods and farms and orchards did present
  And single cottages and lurking towns,
  Reach after reach, succession without end
  Of deep and stately vales! A lonely pair
  Of strangers, till day closed, we sailed along,                    385
  Clustered together with a merry crowd
  Of those emancipated, a blithe host
  Of travellers, chiefly delegates returning
  From the great spousals newly solemnised
  At their chief city, in the sight of Heaven.                       390
  Like bees they swarmed, gaudy and gay as bees;
  Some vapoured in the unruliness of joy,
  And with their swords flourished as if to fight
  The saucy air. In this proud company
  We landed--took with them our evening meal,                        395
  Guests welcome almost as the angels were
  To Abraham of old. The supper done,
  With flowing cups elate and happy thoughts
  We rose at signal given, and formed a ring
  And, hand in hand, danced round and round the board;               400
  All hearts were open, every tongue was loud
  With amity and glee; we bore a name
  Honoured in France, the name of Englishmen,
  And hospitably did they give us hail,
  As their forerunners in a glorious course;                         405
  And round and round the board we danced again.
  With these blithe friends our voyage we renewed
  At early dawn. The monastery bells
  Made a sweet jingling in our youthful ears;
  The rapid river flowing without noise,                             410
  And each uprising or receding spire
  Spake with a sense of peace, at intervals
  Touching the heart amid the boisterous crew
  By whom we were encompassed. Taking leave
  Of this glad throng, foot-travellers side by side,                 415
  Measuring our steps in quiet, we pursued
  Our journey, and ere twice the sun had set
  Beheld the Convent of Chartreuse, and there
  Rested within an awful _solitude_: [p]
  Yes, for even then no other than a place                           420
  Of soul-affecting _solitude_ appeared
  That far-famed region, though our eyes had seen,
  As toward the sacred mansion we advanced,
  Arms flashing, and a military glare
  Of riotous men commissioned to expel                               425
  The blameless inmates, and belike subvert
  That frame of social being, which so long
  Had bodied forth the ghostliness of things
  In silence visible and perpetual calm.

--"Stay, stay your sacrilegious hands!"--The voice                 430
  Was Nature's, uttered from her Alpine throne;
  I heard it then and seem to hear it now--
  "Your impious work forbear, perish what may,
  Let this one temple last, be this one spot
  Of earth devoted to eternity!"                                     435
  She ceased to speak, but while St. Bruno's pines [q]
  Waved their dark tops, not silent as they waved,
  And while below, along their several beds,
  Murmured the sister streams of Life and Death, [r]
  Thus by conflicting passions pressed, my heart                     440
  Responded; "Honour to the patriot's zeal!
  Glory and hope to new-born Liberty!
  Hail to the mighty projects of the time!
  Discerning sword that Justice wields, do thou
  Go forth and prosper; and, ye purging fires,                       445
  Up to the loftiest towers of Pride ascend,
  Fanned by the breath of angry Providence.
  But oh! if Past and Future be the wings,
  On whose support harmoniously conjoined
  Moves the great spirit of human knowledge, spare                   450
  These courts of mystery, where a step advanced
  Between the portals of the shadowy rocks
  Leaves far behind life's treacherous vanities,
  For penitential tears and trembling hopes
  Exchanged--to equalise in God's pure sight                         455
  Monarch and peasant: be the house redeemed
  With its unworldly votaries, for the sake
  Of conquest over sense, hourly achieved
  Through faith and meditative reason, resting
  Upon the word of heaven-imparted truth,                            460
  Calmly triumphant; and for humbler claim
  Of that imaginative impulse sent
  From these majestic floods, yon shining cliffs,
  The untransmuted shapes of many worlds,
  Cerulean ether's pure inhabitants,                                 465
  These forests unapproachable by death,
  That shall endure as long as man endures,
  To think, to hope, to worship, and to feel,
  To struggle, to be lost within himself
  In trepidation, from the blank abyss                               470
  To look with bodily eyes, and be consoled."
  Not seldom since that moment have I wished
  That thou, O Friend! the trouble or the calm
  Hadst shared, when, from profane regards apart,
  In sympathetic reverence we trod                                   475
  The floors of those dim cloisters, till that hour,
  From their foundation, strangers to the presence
  Of unrestricted and unthinking man.
  Abroad, how cheeringly the sunshine lay
  Upon the open lawns! Vallombre's groves                            480
  Entering, [s] we fed the soul with darkness; thence
  Issued, and with uplifted eyes beheld,
  In different quarters of the bending sky,
  The cross of Jesus stand erect, as if
  Hands of angelic powers had fixed it there, [t]                    485
  Memorial reverenced by a thousand storms;
  Yet then, from the undiscriminating sweep
  And rage of one State-whirlwind, insecure.

    'Tis not my present purpose to retrace
  That variegated journey step by step.                              490
  A march it was of military speed, [u]
  And Earth did change her images and forms
  Before us, fast as clouds are changed in heaven.
  Day after day, up early and down late,
  From hill to vale we dropped, from vale to hill                    495
  Mounted--from province on to province swept,
  Keen hunters in a chase of fourteen weeks, [u]
  Eager as birds of prey, or as a ship
  Upon the stretch, when winds are blowing fair:
  Sweet coverts did we cross of pastoral life,                       500
  Enticing valleys, greeted them and left
  Too soon, while yet the very flash and gleam [v]
  Of salutation were not passed away.
  Oh! sorrow for the youth who could have seen
  Unchastened, unsubdued, unawed, unraised                           505
  To patriarchal dignity of mind,
  And pure simplicity of wish and will,
  Those sanctified abodes of peaceful man,
  Pleased (though to hardship born, and compassed round
  With danger, varying as the seasons change),                       510
  Pleased with his daily task, or, if not pleased,
  Contented, from the moment that the dawn
  (Ah! surely not without attendant gleams
  Of soul-illumination) calls him forth
  To industry, by glistenings flung on rocks,                        515
  Whose evening shadows lead him to repose, [w]
  Well might a stranger look with bounding heart
  Down on a green recess, [x] the first I saw
  Of those deep haunts, an aboriginal vale,
  Quiet and lorded over and possessed                                520
  By naked huts, wood-built, and sown like tents
  Or Indian cabins over the fresh lawns
  And by the river side.

                             That very day,
  From a bare ridge [y] we also first beheld
  Unveiled the summit of Mont Blanc, and grieved                     525
  To have a soulless image on the eye
  That had usurped upon a living thought
  That never more could be. The wondrous Vale
  Of Chamouny stretched far below, and soon
  With its dumb cataracts and streams of ice,                        530
  A motionless array of mighty waves,
  Five rivers broad and vast, [z] made rich amends,
  And reconciled us to realities;
  There small birds warble from the leafy trees,
  The eagle soars high in the element,                               535
  There doth the reaper bind the yellow sheaf,
  The maiden spread the haycock in the sun,
  While Winter like a well-tamed lion walks,
  Descending from the mountain to make sport
  Among the cottages by beds of flowers.                             540

    Whate'er in this wide circuit we beheld,
  Or heard, was fitted to our unripe state
  Of intellect and heart. With such a book
  Before our eyes, we could not choose but read
  Lessons of genuine brotherhood, the plain                          545
  And universal reason of mankind,
  The truths of young and old. Nor, side by side
  Pacing, two social pilgrims, or alone
  Each with his humour, could we fail to abound
  In dreams and fictions, pensively composed:                        550
  Dejection taken up for pleasure's sake,
  And gilded sympathies, the willow wreath,
  And sober posies of funereal flowers,
  Gathered among those solitudes sublime
  From formal gardens of the lady Sorrow,                            555
  Did sweeten many a meditative hour.

    Yet still in me with those soft luxuries
  Mixed something of stem mood, an under-thirst
  Of vigour seldom utterly allayed.
  And from that source how different a sadness                       560
  Would issue, let one incident make known.
  When from the Vallais we had turned, and clomb
  Along the Simplon's steep and rugged road, [Aa]
  Following a band of muleteers, we reached
  A halting-place, where all together took                           565
  Their noon-tide meal. Hastily rose our guide,
  Leaving us at the board; awhile we lingered,
  Then paced the beaten downward way that led
  Right to a rough stream's edge, and there broke off;
  The only track now visible was one                                 570
  That from the torrent's further brink held forth
  Conspicuous invitation to ascend
  A lofty mountain. After brief delay
  Crossing the unbridged stream, that road we took,
  And clomb with eagerness, till anxious fears                       575
  Intruded, for we failed to overtake
  Our comrades gone before. By fortunate chance,
  While every moment added doubt to doubt,
  A peasant met us, from whose mouth we learned
  That to the spot which had perplexed us first                      580
  We must descend, and there should find the road,
  Which in the stony channel of the stream
  Lay a few steps, and then along its banks;
  And, that our future course, all plain to sight,
  Was downwards, with the current of that stream.                    585
  Loth to believe what we so grieved to hear,
  For still we had hopes that pointed to the clouds,
  We questioned him again, and yet again;
  But every word that from the peasant's lips
  Came in reply, translated by our feelings,                         590
  Ended in this,--'that we had crossed the Alps'.

    Imagination--here the Power so called
  Through sad incompetence of human speech,
  That awful Power rose from the mind's abyss
  Like an unfathered vapour that enwraps,                            595
  At once, some lonely traveller. I was lost;
  Halted without an effort to break through;
  But to my conscious soul I now can say--
  "I recognise thy glory:" in such strength
  Of usurpation, when the light of sense                             600
  Goes out, but with a flash that has revealed
  The invisible world, doth greatness make abode,
  There harbours; whether we be young or old,
  Our destiny, our being's heart and home,
  Is with infinitude, and only there;                                605
  With hope it is, hope that can never die,
  Effort, and expectation, and desire,
  And something evermore about to be.
  Under such banners militant, the soul
  Seeks for no trophies, struggles for no spoils                     610
  That may attest her prowess, blest in thoughts
  That are their own perfection and reward,
  Strong in herself and in beatitude
  That hides her, like the mighty flood of Nile
  Poured from his fount of Abyssinian clouds                         615
  To fertilise the whole Egyptian plain.

    The melancholy slackening that ensued
  Upon those tidings by the peasant given
  Was soon dislodged. Downwards we hurried fast,
  And, with the half-shaped road which we had missed,                620
  Entered a narrow chasm. The brook and road [1]
  Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy strait, [Bb]
  And with them did we journey several hours
  At a slow pace. [2] The immeasurable height
  Of woods decaying, never to be decayed,                            625
  The stationary blasts of waterfalls,
  And in the narrow rent at every turn
  Winds thwarting winds, bewildered and forlorn,
  The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,
  The rocks that muttered close upon our ears,                       630
  Black drizzling crags that spake by the way-side
  As if a voice were in them, the sick sight
  And giddy prospect of the raving stream,
  The unfettered clouds and region of the Heavens,
  Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light--635
  Were all like workings of one mind, the features
  Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree;
  Characters of the great Apocalypse,
  The types and symbols of Eternity,
  Of first, and last, and midst, and without end.                    640

    That night our lodging was a house that stood
  Alone within the valley, at a point
  Where, tumbling from aloft, a torrent swelled
  The rapid stream whose margin we had trod;
  A dreary mansion, large beyond all need, [Cc]                      645
  With high and spacious rooms, deafened and stunned
  By noise of waters, making innocent sleep
  Lie melancholy among weary bones.

    Uprisen betimes, our journey we renewed,
  Led by the stream, ere noon-day magnified                          650
  Into a lordly river, broad and deep,
  Dimpling along in silent majesty,
  With mountains for its neighbours, and in view
  Of distant mountains and their snowy tops,
  And thus proceeding to Locarno's Lake, [Dd]                        655
  Fit resting-place for such a visitant.
  Locarno! spreading out in width like Heaven,
  How dost thou cleave to the poetic heart,
  Bask in the sunshine of the memory;
  And Como! thou, a treasure whom the earth                          660
  Keeps to herself, confined as in a depth
  Of Abyssinian privacy. I spake
  Of thee, thy chestnut woods, [Ee] and garden plots
  Of Indian corn tended by dark-eyed maids;
  Thy lofty steeps, and pathways roofed with vines,                  665
  Winding from house to house, from town to town,
  Sole link that binds them to each other; [Ff] walks,
  League after league, and cloistral avenues,
  Where silence dwells if music be not there:
  While yet a youth undisciplined in verse,                          670
  Through fond ambition of that hour I strove
  To chant your praise; [Gg] nor can approach you now
  Ungreeted by a more melodious Song,
  Where tones of Nature smoothed by learned Art
  May flow in lasting current. Like a breeze                         675
  Or sunbeam over your domain I passed
  In motion without pause; but ye have left
  Your beauty with me, a serene accord
  Of forms and colours, passive, yet endowed
  In their submissiveness with power as sweet                        680
  And gracious, almost might I dare to say,
  As virtue is, or goodness; sweet as love,
  Or the remembrance of a generous deed,
  Or mildest visitations of pure thought,
  When God, the giver of all joy, is thanked                         685
  Religiously, in silent blessedness;
  Sweet as this last herself, for such it is.

    With those delightful pathways we advanced,
  For two days' space, in presence of the Lake,
  That, stretching far among the Alps, assumed                       690
  A character more stern. The second night,
  From sleep awakened, and misled by sound
  Of the church clock telling the hours with strokes
  Whose import then we had not learned, we rose
  By moonlight, doubting not that day was nigh,                      695
  And that meanwhile, by no uncertain path,
  Along the winding margin of the lake,
  Led, as before, we should behold the scene
  Hushed in profound repose. We left the town
  Of Gravedona [Hh] with this hope; but soon                         700
  Were lost, bewildered among woods immense,
  And on a rock sate down, to wait for day.
  An open place it was, and overlooked,
  From high, the sullen water far beneath,
  On which a dull red image of the moon                              705
  Lay bedded, changing oftentimes its form
  Like an uneasy snake. From hour to hour
  We sate and sate, wondering, as if the night
  Had been ensnared by witchcraft. On the rock
  At last we stretched our weary limbs for sleep,                    710
  But _could not_ sleep, tormented by the stings
  Of insects, which, with noise like that of noon,
  Filled all the woods; the cry of unknown birds;
  The mountains more by blackness visible
  And their own size, than any outward light;                        715
  The breathless wilderness of clouds; the clock
  That told, with unintelligible voice,
  The widely parted hours; the noise of streams,
  And sometimes rustling motions nigh at hand,
  That did not leave us free from personal fear;                     720
  And, lastly, the withdrawing moon, that set
  Before us, while she still was high in heaven;--
  These were our food; and such a summer's night [Ii]
  Followed that pair of golden days that shed
  On Como's Lake, and all that round it lay,                         725
  Their fairest, softest, happiest influence.

    But here I must break off, and bid farewell
  To days, each offering some new sight, or fraught
  With some untried adventure, in a course
  Prolonged till sprinklings of autumnal snow                        730
  Checked our unwearied steps. Let this alone
  Be mentioned as a parting word, that not
  In hollow exultation, dealing out
  Hyperboles of praise comparative;
  Not rich one moment to be poor for ever;                           735
  Not prostrate, overborne, as if the mind
  Herself were nothing, a mere pensioner
  On outward forms--did we in presence stand
  Of that magnificent region. On the front
  Of this whole Song is written that my heart                        740
  Must, in such Temple, needs have offered up
  A different worship. Finally, whate'er
  I saw, or heard, or felt, was but a stream
  That flowed into a kindred stream; a gale,
  Confederate with the current of the soul,                          745
  To speed my voyage; every sound or sight,
  In its degree of power, administered
  To grandeur or to tenderness,--to the one
  Directly, but to tender thoughts by means
  Less often instantaneous in effect;                                750
  Led me to these by paths that, in the main,
  Were more circuitous, but not less sure
  Duly to reach the point marked out by Heaven.

    Oh, most beloved Friend! a glorious time,
  A happy time that was; triumphant looks                            755
  Were then the common language of all eyes;
  As if awaked from sleep, the Nations hailed
  Their great expectancy: the fife of war
  Was then a spirit-stirring sound indeed,
  A black-bird's whistle in a budding grove.                         760
  We left the Swiss exulting in the fate
  Of their near neighbours; and, when shortening fast
  Our pilgrimage, nor distant far from home,
  We crossed the Brabant armies on the fret [Kk]
  For battle in the cause of Liberty.                                765
  A stripling, scarcely of the household then
  Of social life, I looked upon these things
  As from a distance; heard, and saw, and felt,
  Was touched, but with no intimate concern;
  I seemed to move along them, as a bird                             770
  Moves through the air, or as a fish pursues
  Its sport, or feeds in its proper element;
  I wanted not that joy, I did not need
  Such help; the ever-living universe,
  Turn where I might, was opening out its glories,                   775
  And the independent spirit of pure youth
  Called forth, at every season, new delights
  Spread round my steps like sunshine o'er green fields.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

... gloomy Pass,    1845.]


[Variant 2:

At a slow step      1845.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: To Cambridge. The Anglo-Saxons called it 'Grantabridge', of
which Cambridge may be a corruption, Granta and Cam being different
names for the same stream. Grantchester is still the name of a village
near Cambridge. It is uncertain whether the village or the city itself
is the spot of which Bede writes, "venerunt ad civitatulam quandam
desolatam, quae lingua Anglorum 'Grantachester' vocatur." If it was
Cambridge itself it had already an alternative name, _viz._
'Camboricum'. Compare 'Cache-cache', a Tale in Verse, by William D.
Watson. London: Smith, Elder, and Co. 1862:

  "Leaving our woods and mountains for the plains
  Of treeless level Granta." (p. 103.)
         ...
                     "'Twas then the time
  When in two camps, like Pope and Emperor,
  Byron and Wordsworth parted Granta's sons."

(p. 121.) Ed.]


[Footnote B: Note the meaning, as well as the 'curiosa felicitas', of
this phrase.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: His Cambridge studies were very miscellaneous, partly owing
to his strong natural disinclination to work by rule, partly to
unmethodic training at Hawkshead, and to the fact that he had already
mastered so much of Euclid and Algebra as to have a twelvemonth's start
of the freshmen of his year.

  "Accordingly," he tells us, "I got into rather an idle way, reading
  nothing but Classic authors, according to my fancy, and Italian
  poetry. As I took to these studies with much interest my Italian
  master was proud of the progress I made. Under his correction I
  translated the Vision of Mirza, and two or three other papers of the
  'Spectator' into Italian."

Speaking of her brother Christopher, then at Cambridge, Dorothy
Wordsworth wrote thus in 1793:

  "He is not so ardent in any of his pursuits as William is, but he is
  yet particularly attached to the same pursuits which have so
  irresistible an influence over William, _and deprive him of the power
  of chaining his attention to others discordant to his feelings._"

Ed.]


[Footnote D: April 1804.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: There is no ash tree now in the grove of St. John's
College, Cambridge, and no tradition as to where it stood. Covered as it
was--trunk and branch--with "clustering ivy" in 1787, it survived till
1808 at any rate. See Note IV. in the Appendix to this volume, p.
390.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: See notes on pp. 210 [Footnote F to Book V] and 223
Footnote C to this Book, above].--Ed.]


[Footnote G: Before leaving Hawkshead he had mastered five books of
Euclid, and in Algebra, simple and quadratic equations. See note, p. 223
[Footnote C to this Book, above].--Ed.]


[Footnote H: Compare the second stanza of the 'Ode to Lycoris':

  'Then, Twilight is preferred to Dawn,
  And Autumn to the Spring.'

Ed.]


[Footnote I: Thomson. See the 'Castle of Indolence', canto I. stanza
xv.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: Dovedale, a rocky chasm, rather more than two miles long,
not far from Ashburn, in Derbyshire. Thomas Potts writes of it
thus:

  "The rugged, dissimilar, and frequently grotesque and fanciful
  appearance of the rocks distinguish the scenery of this valley from
  perhaps every other in the kingdom. In some places they shoot up in
  detached masses, in the form of spires or conical pyramids, to the
  height of 30 or 40 yards.... One rock, distinguished by the name of
  the Pike, from its spiry form and situation in the midst of the
  stream, was noticed in the second part of 'The Complete Angler', by
  Charles Cotton," etc. etc.

('The Beauties of England and Wales,' Derbyshire, vol. iii, pp. 425,
426, and 431. London, 1810.) Potts speaks of the "pellucid waters" of
the Dove. "It is transparent to the bottom." (See Whately, 'Observations
on Modern Gardening', p. 114.)--Ed.]


[Footnote L: Doubtless Wharfedale, Wensleydale, and Swaledale.--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Compare 'Paradise Lost', v. 310, and in Chapman's 'Blind
Beggar of Alexandria':

  'Now see a morning in an evening rise.'

Ed.]


[Footnote N: For glimpses of the friendship of Dorothy Wordsworth and
Coleridge, see the 'Life' of the poet in the last volume of this
edition.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: The absence referred to--"separation desolate"--may refer
both to the Hawkshead years, and to those spent at Cambridge; but
doubtless the brother and sister met at Penrith, in vacation time from
Hawkshead School; and, after William Wordsworth had gone to the
university, Dorothy visited Cambridge, while the brother spent the
Christmas holidays of 1790 at Forncett Rectory in Norfolk, where his
sister was then staying, and where she spent several years with their
uncle Cookson, the Canon of Windsor. It is more probable that the
"separation desolate" refers to the interval between this Christmas of
1790 and their reunion at Halifax in 1794. In a letter dated Forncett,
August 30, 1793, Dorothy says, referring to her brother, "It is nearly
three years since we parted."--Ed.]


[Footnote P: Thomas Wilkinson's poem on the River Emont had been written
in 1787, but was not published till 1824.--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: Brougham Castle, at the junction of the Lowther and the
Emont, about a mile out of Penrith, south-east, on the Appleby road.
This castle is associated with other poems. See the 'Song at the Feast
of Brougham Castle'.--Ed.]


[Footnote R: Sir Philip Sidney, author of 'Arcadia'.--Ed.]


[Footnote S: Mary Hutchinson.--Ed.]


[Footnote T: The Border Beacon is the hill to the north-east of Penrith.
It is now covered with wood, but was in Wordsworth's time a "bare
fell."--Ed.]


[Footnote U: He had gone to Malta, "in search of health."--Ed.]


[Footnote V: The Etesian gales are the mild north winds of the
Mediterranean, which are periodical, lasting about six weeks in spring
and autumn.--Ed.]


[Footnote W: A blue-coat boy in London.--Ed.]


[Footnote X: Christ's Hospital. Compare Charles Lamb's 'Christ's
Hospital Five and Thirty Years Ago'.

  "Come back into memory, like as thou wert in the dayspring of thy
  fancies, with hope like a fiery column before thee--the dark pillar
  not yet turned--Samuel Taylor Coleridge--Logician, Metaphysician,
  Bard!--How have I seen the casual passer through the cloisters stand
  still, entranced with admiration (while he weighed the disproportion
  between the _speech_ and the _garb_ of the young Mirandula), to hear
  thee unfold, in thy deep and sweet intonations, the mysteries of
  Jamblichus, or Plotinus (for even in those years thou waxedst not pale
  at such philosophic draughts), or reciting Homer in his Greek, or
  Pindar--while the walls of the old Grey Friars re-echoed to the
  accents of the _inspired charity boy_!"

('Essays of Elia.')--Ed.]


[Footnote Y: The river Otter, in Devon, thus addressed by Coleridge in
one of his early poems:

  'Dear native Brook! wild Streamlet of the West!
    How many various-fated years have passed,
    What blissful and what anguished hours, since last
  I skimmed the smooth thin stone along thy breast,
    Numbering its light leaps! Yet so deep imprest
  Sink the sweet scenes of Childhood, that mine eyes
  I never shut amid the sunny haze,
    But straight with all their tints, thy waters rise,
  Thy crowning plank, thy margin's willowy maze,
    And bedded sand that veined with various dyes
  Gleamed through thy bright transparence to the gaze!
    Visions of childhood! oft have ye beguiled
  Lone Manhood's cares, yet waking fondest sighs,
    Ah! that once more I were a careless child!'

Ed.]


[Footnote Z: Coleridge entered Jesus College, Cambridge, in February
1791, just a month after Wordsworth had taken his B. A. degree, and left
the university.--Ed.]


[Footnote a: Coleridge worked laboriously but unmethodically at
Cambridge, studying philosophy and politics, besides classics and
mathematics. He lost his scholarship however.--Ed.]


[Footnote b: Debt and despondency; flight to London; enlistment in the
Dragoons; residence in Bristol; Republican lectures; scheme, along with
Southey, for founding a new community in America; its abandonment; his
marriage; life at Nether Stowey; editing 'The Watchman'; lecturing on
Shakespeare; contributing to 'The Morning Chronicle'; preaching in
Unitarian pulpits; publishing his 'Juvenile Poems', etc. etc.; and
throughout eccentric, impetuous, original--with contagious enthusiasm
and overflowing genius--but erratic, self-confident, and unstable.--Ed.]


[Footnote c: Robert Jones, of Plas-yn-llan, near Ruthin, Denbighshire,
to whom the 'Descriptive Sketches', which record the tour, were
dedicated.--Ed.]


[Footnote d: See 'Descriptive Sketches', vol. i. p. 35.--Ed.]


[Footnote e: Compare Shakespeare, 'Sonnets', 16:

  'Now stand you on the top of happy hours.'

Ed.]


[Footnote f: In 1790, most of what could be shaken in the order of
European, and especially of French society and government, _was_ shaken
and changed. By the new constitution of 1790, to which the French king
took an oath of fidelity, his power was reduced to a shadow, and two
years later France became a Republic.

  "We crossed at the time," wrote Wordsworth to his sister, "when the
  whole nation was mad with joy in consequence of the Revolution."

Ed.]


[Footnote g:

  "We went staff in hand, without knapsacks, and carrying each his
  needments tied up in a pocket handkerchief, with about twenty pounds
  a-piece in our pockets."

W. W. ('Autobiographical Memoranda.)--Ed.]


[Footnote h: July 14, 1790.

  "We crossed from Dover and landed at Calais, on the eve of the day
  when the King was to swear fidelity to the new constitution: an event
  which was solemnised with due pomp at Calais."

W. W. ('Autobiographical Memoranda.') See also the sonnet "dedicated to
National Independence and Liberty," vol. ii. p. 332. beginning,

      'Jones! as from Calais southward you and I,
  and compare the human nature seeming born again'

of 'The Prelude', book vi. I, 341, with "the pomp of a too-credulous
day" and the "homeless sound of joy" of the sonnet.--Ed.]


[Footnote i: They went by Ardres, Peronne, Soissons, Chateau Thierry,
Sezanne, Bar le Duc, Chatillon-sur-Seine, Nuits, to Chalons-sur-Saone;
and thence sailed down to Lyons. See Fenwick note to 'Stray Pleasures'
(vol. iv.)

  "The town of Chalons, where my friend Jones and I halted a day, when
  we crossed France, so far on foot. There we embarqued, and floated
  down to Lyons."

Ed.]


[Footnote k: Compare 'Descriptive Sketches', vol. i. p 40:

  'Or where her pathways straggle as they please
  By lonely farms and secret villages.'

Ed.]


[Footnote m:

  "Her road elms rustling thin above my head."

(See 'Descriptive Sketches', vol. i. pp. 39, 40, and compare the two
passages in detail.)--Ed.]


[Footnote n: On the 29th July 1790.--Ed.]


[Footnote o: They were at Lyons on the 30th July.--Ed.]


[Footnote p: They reached the Chartreuse on the 4th of August, and spent
two days there "contemplating, with increasing pleasure," says
Wordsworth, "its wonderful scenery."--Ed.]


[Footnote q: The forest of St. Bruno, near the Chartreuse.--Ed.]


[Footnote r: "Names of rivers at the Chartreuse."--W. W. 1793.

They are called in 'Descriptive Sketches', vol. i. p. 41, "the mystic
streams of Life and Death."--Ed.]


[Footnote s: "Name of one of the vallies of the Chartreuse."--W. W.
1793.]


[Footnote t: "Alluding to crosses seen on the spiry rocks of the
Chartreuse, which have every appearance of being inaccessible."--W. W.
1793.]


[Footnote u: It extended from July 13 to September 29. See the detailed
Itinerary, vol. i. p. 332, and Wordsworth's letter to his sister, from
Keswill, describing the trip.--Ed.]


[Footnote v: See the account of "Urseren's open vale serene," and the
paragraph which follows it in 'Descriptive Sketches', vol. i. pp. 50,
51.--Ed.]


[Footnote w: See the account of these "abodes of peaceful man," in
'Descriptive Sketches', ll. 208-253.--Ed.]


[Footnote x: Probably the valley between Martigny and the Col de
Balme.--Ed.]


[Footnote y: Wordsworth and Jones crossed from Martigny to Chamouni on
the 11th of August. The "bare ridge," from which they first "beheld
unveiled the summit of Mont Blanc," and were disenchanted, was doubtless
the Col de Balme. The first view of the great mountain is not impressive
as seen from that point, or indeed from any of the possible routes to
Chamouni from the Rhone valley, until the village is almost reached. The
best approach is from Sallanches by St. Gervais.--Ed.]


[Footnote z: Compare Coleridge's 'Hymn before sun-rise in the Vale of
Chamouni', and Shelley's 'Mont Blanc', with Wordsworth's description of
the Alps, here in 'The Prelude', in 'Descriptive Sketches', and in the
'Memorials of a Tour on the Continent'.--Ed.]


[Footnote Aa: August 17, 1790.--Ed.]


[Footnote Bb: This passage beginning, "The brook and road," was first
published, amongst the "Poems of the Imagination," in the edition of
1845, under the title of 'The Simplon Pass' (see vol. ii. p. 69). It is
doubtless to this walk down the Italian side of the Simplon route that
Wordsworth refers in the letter to his sister from Keswill, in which he
says,

  "The impression of there hours of our walk among these Alps will never
  be effaced."

Ed.]


[Footnote Cc: The old hospice in the Simplon, which is beside a torrent
below the level of the road, about 22 miles from Duomo d'Ossola.--Ed.]


[Footnote Dd:

  "From Duomo d'Ossola we proceeded to the lake of Locarno,
to visit the Boromean Islands, and thence to Como."

(W. W. to his sister.) The lake of Locarno is now called Lago
Maggiore.--Ed.]


[Footnote Ee:

  "The shores of the lake consist of steeps, covered with large sweeping
  woods of chestnut, spotted with villages."

(W. W. to his sister.)--Ed.]


[Footnote Ff:

  "A small footpath is all the communication by land between one village
  and another on the side along which we passed, for upwards of thirty
  miles. We entered on this path about noon, and, owing to the steepness
  of the banks, were soon unmolested by the sun, which illuminated the
  woods, rocks, and villages of the opposite shore."

(See letter of W. W. from Keswill.)--Ed.]


[Footnote Gg: See 'Descriptive Sketches', vol. i. pp. 42-46.--Ed.]


[Footnote Hh: They followed the lake of Como to its head, leaving
Gravedona on the 20th August.--Ed.]


[Footnote Ii: August 21, 1790.--Ed.]


[Footnote Kk: They reached Cologne on the 28th September, having floated
down the Rhine in a small boat; and from Cologne went to Calais, through
Belgium.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK SEVENTH


RESIDENCE IN LONDON


  Six changeful years have vanished since I first
  Poured out (saluted by that quickening breeze
  Which met me issuing from the City's [A] walls)
  A glad preamble to this Verse: [B] I sang
  Aloud, with fervour irresistible                                     5
  Of short-lived transport, like a torrent bursting,
  From a black thunder-cloud, down Scafell's side
  To rush and disappear. But soon broke forth
  (So willed the Muse) a less impetuous stream,
  That flowed awhile with unabating strength,                         10
  Then stopped for years; not audible again
  Before last primrose-time, [C] Beloved Friend!
  The assurance which then cheered some heavy thoughts
  On thy departure to a foreign land [D]
  Has failed; too slowly moves the promised work.                     15
  Through the whole summer have I been at rest, [E]
  Partly from voluntary holiday,
  And part through outward hindrance. But I heard,
  After the hour of sunset yester-even,
  Sitting within doors between light and dark,                        20
  A choir of redbreasts gathered somewhere near
  My threshold,--minstrels from the distant woods
  Sent in on Winter's service, to announce,
  With preparation artful and benign,
  That the rough lord had left the surly North                        25
  On his accustomed journey. The delight,
  Due to this timely notice, unawares
  Smote me, and, listening, I in whispers said,
  "Ye heartsome Choristers, ye and I will be
  Associates, and, unscared by blustering winds,                      30
  Will chant together." Thereafter, as the shades
  Of twilight deepened, going forth, I spied
  A glow-worm underneath a dusky plume
  Or canopy of yet unwithered fern,
  Clear-shining, like a hermit's taper seen                           35
  Through a thick forest. Silence touched me here
  No less than sound had done before; the child
  Of Summer, lingering, shining, by herself,
  The voiceless worm on the unfrequented hills,
  Seemed sent on the same errand with the choir                       40
  Of Winter that had warbled at my door,
  And the whole year breathed tenderness and love.

    The last night's genial feeling overflowed
  Upon this morning, and my favourite grove,
  Tossing in sunshine its dark boughs aloft, [F]                      45
  As if to make the strong wind visible,
  Wakes in me agitations like its own,
  A spirit friendly to the Poet's task,
  Which we will now resume with lively hope,
  Nor checked by aught of tamer argument                              50
  That lies before us, needful to be told.

    Returned from that excursion, [G] soon I bade
  Farewell for ever to the sheltered seats [H]
  Of gowned students, quitted hall and bower,
  And every comfort of that privileged ground,                        55
  Well pleased to pitch a vagrant tent among
  The unfenced regions of society.

    Yet, undetermined to what course of life
  I should adhere, and seeming to possess
  A little space of intermediate time                                 60
  At full command, to London first I turned, [I]
  In no disturbance of excessive hope,
  By personal ambition unenslaved,
  Frugal as there was need, and, though self-willed,
  From dangerous passions free. Three years had flown [K]             65
  Since I had felt in heart and soul the shock
  Of the huge town's first presence, and had paced
  Her endless streets, a transient visitant: [K]
  Now, fixed amid that concourse of mankind
  Where Pleasure whirls about incessantly,                            70
  And life and labour seem but one, I filled
  An idler's place; an idler well content
  To have a house (what matter for a home?)
  That owned him; living cheerfully abroad
  With unchecked fancy ever on the stir,                              75
  And all my young affections out of doors.

    There was a time when whatsoe'er is feigned
  Of airy palaces, and gardens built
  By Genii of romance; or hath in grave
  Authentic history been set forth of Rome,                           80
  Alcairo, Babylon, or Persepolis;
  Or given upon report by pilgrim friars,
  Of golden cities ten months' journey deep
  Among Tartarian wilds--fell short, far short,
  Of what my fond simplicity believed                                 85
  And thought of London--held me by a chain
  Less strong of wonder and obscure delight.
  Whether the bolt of childhood's Fancy shot
  For me beyond its ordinary mark,
  'Twere vain to ask; but in our flock of boys                        90
  Was One, a cripple from his birth, whom chance
  Summoned from school to London; fortunate
  And envied traveller! When the Boy returned,
  After short absence, curiously I scanned
  His mien and person, nor was free, in sooth,                        95
  From disappointment, not to find some change
  In look and air, from that new region brought,
  As if from Fairy-land. Much I questioned him;
  And every word he uttered, on my ears
  Fell flatter than a caged parrot's note,                           100
  That answers unexpectedly awry,
  And mocks the prompter's listening. Marvellous things
  Had vanity (quick Spirit that appears
  Almost as deeply seated and as strong
  In a Child's heart as fear itself) conceived                       105
  For my enjoyment. Would that I could now
  Recal what then I pictured to myself,
  Of mitred Prelates, Lords in ermine clad,
  The King, and the King's Palace, and, not last,
  Nor least, Heaven bless him! the renowned Lord Mayor:              110
  Dreams not unlike to those which once begat
  A change of purpose in young Whittington,
  When he, a friendless and a drooping boy,
  Sate on a stone, and heard the bells speak out
  Articulate music. [L] Above all, one thought                       115
  Baffled my understanding: how men lived
  Even next-door neighbours, as we say, yet still
  Strangers, not knowing each the other's name.

    O, wond'rous power of words, by simple faith
  Licensed to take the meaning that we love!                         120
  Vauxhall and Ranelagh! I then had heard
  Of your green groves, [M] and wilderness of lamps
  Dimming the stars, and fireworks magical,
  And gorgeous ladies, under splendid domes,
  Floating in dance, or warbling high in air                         125
  The songs of spirits! Nor had Fancy fed
  With less delight upon that other class
  Of marvels, broad-day wonders permanent:
  The River proudly bridged; the dizzy top
  And Whispering Gallery of St. Paul's; the tombs                    130
  Of Westminster; the Giants of Guildhall;
  Bedlam, and those carved maniacs at the gates, [N]
  Perpetually recumbent; Statues--man,
  And the horse under him--in gilded pomp
  Adorning flowery gardens, 'mid vast squares;                       135
  The Monument, [O] and that Chamber of the Tower [P]
  Where England's sovereigns sit in long array,
  Their steeds bestriding,--every mimic shape
  Cased in the gleaming mail the monarch wore,
  Whether for gorgeous tournament addressed,                         140
  Or life or death upon the battle-field.
  Those bold imaginations in due time
  Had vanished, leaving others in their stead:
  And now I looked upon the living scene;
  Familiarly perused it; oftentimes,                                 145
  In spite of strongest disappointment, pleased
  Through courteous self-submission, as a tax
  Paid to the object by prescriptive right.

    Rise up, thou monstrous ant-hill on the plain
  Of a too busy world! Before me flow,                               150
  Thou endless stream of men and moving things!
  Thy every-day appearance, as it strikes--
  With wonder heightened, or sublimed by awe--
  On strangers, of all ages; the quick dance
  Of colours, lights, and forms; the deafening din;                  155
  The comers and the goers face to face,
  Face after face; the string of dazzling wares,
  Shop after shop, with symbols, blazoned names,
  And all the tradesman's honours overhead:
  Here, fronts of houses, like a title-page,                         160
  With letters huge inscribed from top to toe,
  Stationed above the door, like guardian saints;
  There, allegoric shapes, female or male,
  Or physiognomies of real men,
  Land-warriors, kings, or admirals of the sea,                      165
  Boyle, Shakespeare, Newton, or the attractive head
  Of some quack-doctor, famous in his day.

  Meanwhile the roar continues, till at length,
  Escaped as from an enemy, we turn
  Abruptly into some sequestered nook,                               170
  Still as a sheltered place when winds blow loud!
  At leisure, thence, through tracts of thin resort,
  And sights and sounds that come at intervals,
  We take our way. A raree-show is here,
  With children gathered round; another street                       175
  Presents a company of dancing dogs,
  Or dromedary, with an antic pair
  Of monkeys on his back; a minstrel band
  Of Savoyards; or, single and alone,
  An English ballad-singer. Private courts,                          180
  Gloomy as coffins, and unsightly lanes
  Thrilled by some female vendor's scream, belike
  The very shrillest of all London cries,
  May then entangle our impatient steps;
  Conducted through those labyrinths, unawares,                      185
  To privileged regions and inviolate,
  Where from their airy lodges studious lawyers
  Look out on waters, walks, and gardens green.

    Thence back into the throng, until we reach,
  Following the tide that slackens by degrees,                       190
  Some half-frequented scene, where wider streets
  Bring straggling breezes of suburban air.
  Here files of ballads dangle from dead walls;
  Advertisements, of giant-size, from high
  Press forward, in all colours, on the sight;                       195
  These, bold in conscious merit, lower down;
  _That_, fronted with a most imposing word,
  Is, peradventure, one in masquerade.
  As on the broadening causeway we advance,
  Behold, turned upwards, a face hard and strong                     200
  In lineaments, and red with over-toil.
  'Tis one encountered here and everywhere;
  A travelling cripple, by the trunk cut short,
  And stumping on his arms. In sailor's garb
  Another lies at length, beside a range                             205
  Of well-formed characters, with chalk inscribed
  Upon the smooth flat stones: the Nurse is here,
  The Bachelor, that loves to sun himself,
  The military Idler, and the Dame,
  That field-ward takes her walk with decent steps.                  210

    Now homeward through the thickening hubbub, where
  See, among less distinguishable shapes,
  The begging scavenger, with hat in hand;
  The Italian, as he thrids his way with care,
  Steadying, far-seen, a frame of images                             215
  Upon his head; with basket at his breast
  The Jew; the stately and slow-moving Turk,
  With freight of slippers piled beneath his arm!

    Enough;--the mighty concourse I surveyed
  With no unthinking mind, well pleased to note                      220
  Among the crowd all specimens of man,
  Through all the colours which the sun bestows,
  And every character of form and face:
  The Swede, the Russian; from the genial south,
  The Frenchman and the Spaniard; from remote                        225
  America, the Hunter-Indian; Moors,
  Malays, Lascars, the Tartar, the Chinese,
  And Negro Ladies in white muslin gowns.

    At leisure, then, I viewed, from day to day,
  The spectacles within doors,--birds and beasts                     230
  Of every nature, and strange plants convened
  From every clime; and, next, those sights that ape
  The absolute presence of reality,
  Expressing, as in mirror, sea and land,
  And what earth is, and what she has to shew.                       235
  I do not here allude to subtlest craft,
  By means refined attaining purest ends,
  But imitations, fondly made in plain
  Confession of man's weakness and his loves.
  Whether the Painter, whose ambitious skill                         240
  Submits to nothing less than taking in
  A whole horizon's circuit, do with power,
  Like that of angels or commissioned spirits,
  Fix us upon some lofty pinnacle,
  Or in a ship on waters, with a world                               245
  Of life, and life-like mockery beneath,
  Above, behind, far stretching and before;
  Or more mechanic artist represent
  By scale exact, in model, wood or clay,
  From blended colours also borrowing help,                          250
  Some miniature of famous spots or things,--
  St. Peter's Church; or, more aspiring aim,
  In microscopic vision, Rome herself;
  Or, haply, some choice rural haunt,--the Falls
  Of Tivoli; and, high upon that steep,                              255
  The Sibyl's mouldering Temple! every tree,
  Villa, or cottage, lurking among rocks
  Throughout the landscape; tuft, stone scratch minute--
  All that the traveller sees when he is there.

    Add to these exhibitions, mute and still,                        260
  Others of wider scope, where living men,
  Music, and shifting pantomimic scenes,
  Diversified the allurement. Need I fear
  To mention by its name, as in degree,
  Lowest of these and humblest in attempt,                           265
  Yet richly graced with honours of her own,
  Half-rural Sadler's Wells? [Q] Though at that time
  Intolerant, as is the way of youth
  Unless itself be pleased, here more than once
  Taking my seat, I saw (nor blush to add,                           270
  With ample recompense) giants and dwarfs,
  Clowns, conjurors, posture-masters, harlequins,
  Amid the uproar of the rabblement,
  Perform their feats. Nor was it mean delight
  To watch crude Nature work in untaught minds;                      275
  To note the laws and progress of belief;
  Though obstinate on this way, yet on that
  How willingly we travel, and how far!
  To have, for instance, brought upon the scene
  The champion, Jack the Giant-killer: Lo!                           280
  He dons his coat of darkness; on the stage
  Walks, and achieves his wonders, from the eye
  Of living Mortal covert, "as the moon
  Hid in her vacant interlunar cave." [R]
  Delusion bold! and how can it be wrought?                          285
  The garb he wears is black as death, the word
  "_Invisible_" flames forth upon his chest.

    Here, too, were "forms and pressures of the time," [S]
  Rough, bold, as Grecian comedy displayed
  When Art was young; dramas of living men,                          290
  And recent things yet warm with life; a sea-fight,
  Shipwreck, or some domestic incident
  Divulged by Truth and magnified by Fame,
  Such as the daring brotherhood of late
  Set forth, too serious theme for that light place--295
  I mean, O distant Friend! a story drawn
  From our own ground,--the Maid of Buttermere,--[T]
  And how, unfaithful to a virtuous wife
  Deserted and deceived, the spoiler came
  And wooed the artless daughter of the hills,                       300
  And wedded her, in cruel mockery
  Of love and marriage bonds. [U] These words to thee
  Must needs bring back the moment when we first,
  Ere the broad world rang with the maiden's name,
  Beheld her serving at the cottage inn,                             305
  Both stricken, as she entered or withdrew,
  With admiration of her modest mien
  And carriage, marked by unexampled grace.
  We since that time not unfamiliarly
  Have seen her,--her discretion have observed,                      310
  Her just opinions, delicate reserve,
  Her patience, and humility of mind
  Unspoiled by commendation and the excess
  Of public notice--an offensive light
  To a meek spirit suffering inwardly.                               315

    From this memorial tribute to my theme
  I was returning, when, with sundry forms
  Commingled--shapes which met me in the way
  That we must tread--thy image rose again,
  Maiden of Buttermere! She lives in peace                           320
  Upon the spot where she was born and reared;
  Without contamination doth she live
  In quietness, without anxiety:
  Beside the mountain chapel, sleeps in earth
  Her new-born infant, fearless as a lamb                            325
  That, thither driven from some unsheltered place,
  Rests underneath the little rock-like pile
  When storms are raging. Happy are they both--
  Mother and child!--These feelings, in themselves
  Trite, do yet scarcely seem so when I think                        330
  On those ingenuous moments of our youth
  Ere we have learnt by use to slight the crimes
  And sorrows of the world. Those simple days
  Are now my theme; and, foremost of the scenes,
  Which yet survive in memory, appears                               335
  One, at whose centre sate a lovely Boy,
  A sportive infant, who, for six months' space,
  Not more, had been of age to deal about
  Articulate prattle--Child as beautiful
  As ever clung around a mother's neck,                              340
  Or father fondly gazed upon with pride.
  There, too, conspicuous for stature tall
  And large dark eyes, beside her infant stood
  The mother; but, upon her cheeks diffused,
  False tints too well accorded with the glare                       345
  From play-house lustres thrown without reserve
  On every object near. The Boy had been
  The pride and pleasure of all lookers-on
  In whatsoever place, but seemed in this
  A sort of alien scattered from the clouds.                         350
  Of lusty vigour, more than infantine
  He was in limb, in cheek a summer rose
  Just three parts blown--a cottage-child--if e'er,
  By cottage-door on breezy mountain side,
  Or in some sheltering vale, was seen a babe                        355
  By Nature's gifts so favoured. Upon a board
  Decked with refreshments had this child been placed,
  _His_ little stage in the vast theatre,
  And there he sate surrounded with a throng
  Of chance spectators, chiefly dissolute men                        360
  And shameless women, treated and caressed;
  Ate, drank, and with the fruit and glasses played,
  While oaths and laughter and indecent speech
  Were rife about him as the songs of birds
  Contending after showers. The mother now                           365
  Is fading out of memory, but I see
  The lovely Boy as I beheld him then
  Among the wretched and the falsely gay,
  Like one of those who walked with hair unsinged
  Amid the fiery furnace. Charms and spells                          370
  Muttered on black and spiteful instigation
  Have stopped, as some believe, the kindliest growths.
  Ah, with how different spirit might a prayer
  Have been preferred, that this fair creature, checked
  By special privilege of Nature's love,                             375
  Should in his childhood be detained for ever!
  But with its universal freight the tide
  Hath rolled along, and this bright innocent,
  Mary! may now have lived till he could look
  With envy on thy nameless babe that sleeps,                        380
  Beside the mountain chapel, undisturbed.

  Four rapid years had scarcely then been told [V]
  Since, travelling southward from our pastoral hills,
  I heard, and for the first time in my life,
  The voice of woman utter blasphemy--385
  Saw woman as she is, to open shame
  Abandoned, and the pride of public vice;
  I shuddered, for a barrier seemed at once
  Thrown in, that from humanity divorced
  Humanity, splitting the race of man                                390
  In twain, yet leaving the same outward form.
  Distress of mind ensued upon the sight
  And ardent meditation. Later years
  Brought to such spectacle a milder sadness.
  Feelings of pure commiseration, grief                              395
  For the individual and the overthrow
  Of her soul's beauty; farther I was then
  But seldom led, or wished to go; in truth
  The sorrow of the passion stopped me there.

  But let me now, less moved, in order take                          400
  Our argument. Enough is said to show
  How casual incidents of real life,
  Observed where pastime only had been sought,
  Outweighed, or put to flight, the set events
  And measured passions of the stage, albeit                         405
  By Siddons trod in the fulness of her power.
  Yet was the theatre my dear delight;
  The very gilding, lamps and painted scrolls,
  And all the mean upholstery of the place,
  Wanted not animation, when the tide                                410
  Of pleasure ebbed but to return as fast
  With the ever-shifting figures of the scene,
  Solemn or gay: whether some beauteous dame
  Advanced in radiance through a deep recess
  Of thick entangled forest, like the moon                           415
  Opening the clouds; or sovereign king, announced
  With flourishing trumpet, came in full-blown state
  Of the world's greatness, winding round with train
  Of courtiers, banners, and a length of guards;
  Or captive led in abject weeds, and jingling                       420
  His slender manacles; or romping girl
  Bounced, leapt, and pawed the air; or mumbling sire,
  A scare-crow pattern of old age dressed up
  In all the tatters of infirmity
  All loosely put together, hobbled in,                              425
  Stumping upon a cane with which he smites,
  From time to time, the solid boards, and makes them
  Prate somewhat loudly of the whereabout [W]
  Of one so overloaded with his years.
  But what of this! the laugh, the grin, grimace,                    430
  The antics striving to outstrip each other,
  Were all received, the least of them not lost,
  With an unmeasured welcome. Through the night,
  Between the show, and many-headed mass
  Of the spectators, and each several nook                           435
  Filled with its fray or brawl, how eagerly
  And with what flashes, as it were, the mind
  Turned this way--that way! sportive and alert
  And watchful, as a kitten when at play,
  While winds are eddying round her, among straws                    440
  And rustling leaves. Enchanting age and sweet!
  Romantic almost, looked at through a space,
  How small, of intervening years! For then,
  Though surely no mean progress had been made
  In meditations holy and sublime,                                   445
  Yet something of a girlish child-like gloss
  Of novelty survived for scenes like these;
  Enjoyment haply handed down from times
  When at a country-playhouse, some rude barn
  Tricked out for that proud use, if I perchance                     450
  Caught, on a summer evening through a chink
  In the old wall, an unexpected glimpse
  Of daylight, the bare thought of where I was
  Gladdened me more than if I had been led
  Into a dazzling cavern of romance,                                 455
  Crowded with Genii busy among works
  Not to be looked at by the common sun.

  The matter that detains us now may seem,
  To many, neither dignified enough
  Nor arduous, yet will not be scorned by them,                      460
  Who, looking inward, have observed the ties
  That bind the perishable hours of life
  Each to the other, and the curious props
  By which the world of memory and thought
  Exists and is sustained. More lofty themes,                        465
  Such as at least do wear a prouder face,
  Solicit our regard; but when I think
  Of these, I feel the imaginative power
  Languish within me; even then it slept,
  When, pressed by tragic sufferings, the heart                      470
  Was more than full; amid my sobs and tears
  It slept, even in the pregnant season of youth.
  For though I was most passionately moved
  And yielded to all changes of the scene
  With an obsequious promptness, yet the storm                       475
  Passed not beyond the suburbs of the mind;
  Save when realities of act and mien,
  The incarnation of the spirits that move
  In harmony amid the Poet's world,
  Rose to ideal grandeur, or, called forth                           480
  By power of contrast, made me recognise,
  As at a glance, the things which I had shaped,
  And yet not shaped, had seen and scarcely seen,
  When, having closed the mighty Shakespeare's page,
  I mused, and thought, and felt, in solitude.                       485

  Pass we from entertainments, that are such
  Professedly, to others titled higher,
  Yet, in the estimate of youth at least,
  More near akin to those than names imply,--
  I mean the brawls of lawyers in their courts                       490
  Before the ermined judge, or that great stage [X]
  Where senators, tongue-favoured men, perform,
  Admired and envied. Oh! the beating heart,
  When one among the prime of these rose up,--
  One, of whose name from childhood we had heard                     495
  Familiarly, a household term, like those,
  The Bedfords, Glosters, Salsburys, of old
  Whom the fifth Harry talks of. [Y] Silence! hush!
  This is no trifler, no short-flighted wit,
  No stammerer of a minute, painfully                                500
  Delivered. No! the Orator hath yoked
  The Hours, like young Aurora, to his car:
  Thrice welcome Presence! how can patience e'er
  Grow weary of attending on a track
  That kindles with such glory! All are charmed,                     505
  Astonished; like a hero in romance,
  He winds away his never-ending horn;
  Words follow words, sense seems to follow sense:
  What memory and what logic! till the strain
  Transcendent, superhuman as it seemed,                             510
  Grows tedious even in a young man's ear.

    Genius of Burke! forgive the pen seduced
  By specious wonders, and too slow to tell
  Of what the ingenuous, what bewildered men,
  Beginning to mistrust their boastful guides,                       515
  And wise men, willing to grow wiser, caught,
  Rapt auditors! from thy most eloquent tongue--
  Now mute, for ever mute in the cold grave.
  I see him,--old, but Vigorous in age,--
  Stand like an oak whose stag-horn branches start                   520
  Out of its leafy brow, the more to awe
  The younger brethren of the grove. But some--
  While he forewarns, denounces, launches forth,
  Against all systems built on abstract rights,
  Keen ridicule; the majesty proclaims                               525
  Of Institutes and Laws, hallowed by time;
  Declares the vital power of social ties
  Endeared by Custom; and with high disdain,
  Exploding upstart Theory, insists
  Upon the allegiance to which men are born--530
  Some--say at once a froward multitude--
  Murmur (for truth is hated, where not loved)
  As the winds fret within the AEolian cave,
  Galled by their monarch's chain. The times were big
  With ominous change, which, night by night, provoked               535
  Keen struggles, and black clouds of passion raised;
  But memorable moments intervened,
  When Wisdom, like the Goddess from Jove's brain,
  Broke forth in armour of resplendent words,
  Startling the Synod. Could a youth, and one                        540
  In ancient story versed, whose breast had heaved
  Under the weight of classic eloquence,
  Sit, see, and hear, unthankful, uninspired?

    Nor did the Pulpit's oratory fail
  To achieve its higher triumph. Not unfelt                          545
  Were its admonishments, nor lightly heard
  The awful truths delivered thence by tongues
  Endowed with various power to search the soul;
  Yet ostentation, domineering, oft
  Poured forth harangues, how sadly out of place!--550
  There have I seen a comely bachelor,
  Fresh from a toilette of two hours, ascend
  His rostrum, with seraphic glance look up,
  And, in a tone elaborately low
  Beginning, lead his voice through many a maze                      555
  A minuet course; and, winding up his mouth,
  From time to time, into an orifice
  Most delicate, a lurking eyelet, small,
  And only not invisible, again
  Open it out, diffusing thence a smile                              560
  Of rapt irradiation, exquisite.
  Meanwhile the Evangelists, Isaiah, Job,
  Moses, and he who penned, the other day,
  The Death of Abel, [Z] Shakespeare, and the Bard
  Whose genius spangled o'er a gloomy theme                          565
  With fancies thick as his inspiring stars, [a]
  And Ossian (doubt not, 'tis the naked truth)
  Summoned from streamy Morven [b]--each and all
  Would, in their turns, lend ornaments and flowers
  To entwine the crook of eloquence that helped                      570
  This pretty Shepherd, pride of all the plains,
  To rule and guide his captivated flock.

  I glance but at a few conspicuous marks,
  Leaving a thousand others, that, in hall,
  Court, theatre, conventicle, or shop,                              575
  In public room or private, park or street,
  Each fondly reared on his own pedestal,
  Looked out for admiration. Folly, vice,
  Extravagance in gesture, mien, and dress,
  And all the strife of singularity,                                 580
  Lies to the ear, and lies to every sense--
  Of these, and of the living shapes they wear,
  There is no end. Such candidates for regard,
  Although well pleased to be where they were found,
  I did not hunt after, nor greatly prize,                           585
  Nor made unto myself a secret boast
  Of reading them with quick and curious eye;
  But, as a common produce, things that are
  To-day, to-morrow will be, took of them
  Such willing note, as, on some errand bound                        590
  That asks not speed, a Traveller might bestow
  On sea-shells that bestrew the sandy beach,
  Or daisies swarming through the fields of June.

    But foolishness and madness in parade,
  Though most at home in this their dear domain,                     595
  Are scattered everywhere, no rarities,
  Even to the rudest novice of the Schools.
  Me, rather, it employed, to note, and keep
  In memory, those individual sights
  Of courage, or integrity, or truth,                                600
  Or tenderness, which there, set off by foil,
  Appeared more touching. One will I select;
  A Father--for he bore that sacred name--
  Him saw I, sitting in an open square,
  Upon a corner-stone of that low wall,                              605
  Wherein were fixed the iron pales that fenced
  A spacious grass-plot; there, in silence, sate
  This One Man, with a sickly babe outstretched
  Upon his knee, whom he had thither brought
  For sunshine, and to breathe the fresher air.                      610
  Of those who passed, and me who looked at him,
  He took no heed; but in his brawny arms
  (The Artificer was to the elbow bare,
  And from his work this moment had been stolen)
  He held the child, and, bending over it,                           615
  As if he were afraid both of the sun
  And of the air, which he had come to seek,
  Eyed the poor babe with love unutterable.

    As the black storm upon the mountain top
  Sets off the sunbeam in the valley, so                             620
  That huge fermenting mass of human-kind
  Serves as a solemn back-ground, or relief,
  To single forms and objects, whence they draw,
  For feeling and contemplative regard,
  More than inherent liveliness and power.                           625
  How oft, amid those overflowing streets,
  Have I gone forward with the crowd, and said
  Unto myself, "The face of every one
  That passes by me is a mystery!"
  Thus have I looked, nor ceased to look, oppressed                  630
  By thoughts of what and whither, when and how,
  Until the shapes before my eyes became
  A second-sight procession, such as glides
  Over still mountains, or appears in dreams;
  And once, far-travelled in such mood, beyond                       635
  The reach of common indication, lost
  Amid the moving pageant, I was smitten
  Abruptly, with the view (a sight not rare)
  Of a blind Beggar, who, with upright face,
  Stood, propped against a wall, upon his chest                      640
  Wearing a written paper, to explain
  His story, whence he came, and who he was.
  Caught by the spectacle my mind turned round
  As with the might of waters; an apt type
  This label seemed of the utmost we can know,                       645
  Both of ourselves and of the universe;
  And, on the shape of that unmoving man,
  His steadfast face and sightless eyes, I gazed,
  As if admonished from another world.

    Though reared upon the base of outward things,                   650
  Structures like these the excited spirit mainly
  Builds for herself; scenes different there are,
  Full-formed, that take, with small internal help,
  Possession of the faculties,--the peace
  That comes with night; the deep solemnity                          655
  Of nature's intermediate hours of rest,
  When the great tide of human life stands still;
  The business of the day to come, unborn,
  Of that gone by, locked up, as in the grave;
  The blended calmness of the heavens and earth,                     660
  Moonlight and stars, and empty streets, and sounds
  Unfrequent as in deserts; at late hours
  Of winter evenings, when unwholesome rains
  Are falling hard, with people yet astir,
  The feeble salutation from the voice                               665
  Of some unhappy woman, now and then
  Heard as we pass, when no one looks about,
  Nothing is listened to. But these, I fear,
  Are falsely catalogued; things that are, are not,
  As the mind answers to them, or the heart                          670
  Is prompt, or slow, to feel. What say you, then,
  To times, when half the city shall break out
  Full of one passion, vengeance, rage, or fear?
  To executions, to a street on fire,
  Mobs, riots, or rejoicings? From these sights                      675
  Take one,--that ancient festival, the Fair,
  Holden where martyrs suffered in past time,
  And named of St. Bartholomew; [c] there, see
  A work completed to our hands, that lays,
  If any spectacle on earth can do,                                  680
  The whole creative powers of man asleep!--
  For once, the Muse's help will we implore,
  And she shall lodge us, wafted on her wings,
  Above the press and danger of the crowd,
  Upon some showman's platform. What a shock                         685
  For eyes and ears! what anarchy and din,
  Barbarian and infernal,--a phantasma,
  Monstrous in colour, motion, shape, sight, sound!
  Below, the open space, through every nook
  Of the wide area, twinkles, is alive                               690
  With heads; the midway region, and above,
  Is thronged with staring pictures and huge scrolls,
  Dumb proclamations of the Prodigies;
  With chattering monkeys dangling from their poles,
  And children whirling in their roundabouts;                        695
  With those that stretch the neck and strain the eyes,
  And crack the voice in rivalship, the crowd
  Inviting; with buffoons against buffoons
  Grimacing, writhing, screaming,--him who grinds
  The hurdy-gurdy, at the fiddle weaves,                             700
  Rattles the salt-box, thumps the kettle-drum,
  And him who at the trumpet puffs his cheeks,
  The silver-collared Negro with his timbrel,
  Equestrians, tumblers, women, girls, and boys,
  Blue-breeched, pink-vested, with high-towering plumes.--705
  All moveables of wonder, from all parts,
  Are here--Albinos, painted Indians, Dwarfs,
  The Horse of knowledge, and the learned Pig,
  The Stone-eater, the man that swallows fire,
  Giants, Ventriloquists, the Invisible Girl,                        710
  The Bust that speaks and moves its goggling eyes,
  The Wax-work, Clock-work, all the marvellous craft
  Of modern Merlins, Wild Beasts, Puppet-shows,
  All out-o'-the-way, far-fetched, perverted things,
  All freaks of nature, all Promethean thoughts                      715
  Of man, his dullness, madness, and their feats
  All jumbled up together, to compose
  A Parliament of Monsters. Tents and Booths
  Meanwhile, as if the whole were one vast mill,
  Are vomiting, receiving on all sides,                              720
  Men, Women, three-years' Children, Babes in arms.

    Oh, blank confusion! true epitome
  Of what the mighty City is herself,
  To thousands upon thousands of her sons,
  Living amid the same perpetual whirl                               725
  Of trivial objects, melted and reduced
  To one identity, by differences
  That have no law, no meaning, and no end--
  Oppression, under which even highest minds
  Must labour, whence the strongest are not free. [d]                730
  But though the picture weary out the eye,
  By nature an unmanageable sight,
  It is not wholly so to him who looks
  In steadiness, who hath among least things
  An under-sense of greatest; sees the parts                         735
  As parts, but with a feeling of the whole.
  This, of all acquisitions, first awaits
  On sundry and most widely different modes
  Of education, nor with least delight
  On that through which I passed. Attention springs,                 740
  And comprehensiveness and memory flow,
  From early converse with the works of God
  Among all regions; chiefly where appear
  Most obviously simplicity and power.
  Think, how the everlasting streams and woods,                      745
  Stretched and still stretching far and wide, exalt
  The roving Indian, on his desert sands:
  What grandeur not unfelt, what pregnant show
  Of beauty, meets the sun-burnt Arab's eye:
  And, as the sea propels, from zone to zone,                        750
  Its currents; magnifies its shoals of life
  Beyond all compass; spreads, and sends aloft
  Armies of clouds,--even so, its powers and aspects
  Shape for mankind, by principles as fixed,
  The views and aspirations of the soul                              755
  To majesty. Like virtue have the forms
  Perennial of the ancient hills; nor less
  The changeful language of their countenances
  Quickens the slumbering mind, and aids the thoughts,
  However multitudinous, to move                                     760
  With order and relation. This, if still,
  As hitherto, in freedom I may speak,
  Not violating any just restraint,
  As may be hoped, of real modesty,--
  This did I feel, in London's vast domain.                          765
  The Spirit of Nature was upon me there;
  The soul of Beauty and enduring Life
  Vouchsafed her inspiration, and diffused,
  Through meagre lines and colours, and the press
  Of self-destroying, transitory things,                             770
  Composure, and ennobling Harmony.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Goslar, February 10th, 1799. Compare Mr. Carter's note to
'The Prelude', book vii. l. 3.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: The first two paragraphs of book i.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: April 1804: see the reference in book vi. l. 48.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Before he left for Malta, Coleridge had urged Wordsworth to
complete this work.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: The summer of 1804.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Doubtless John's Grove, below White Moss Common. On
November 24, 1801, Dorothy Wordsworth wrote in her Journal,

  "As we were going along, we were stopped at once, at the distance
  perhaps of fifty yards from our favourite birch tree. It was yielding
  to the gusty wind with all its tender twigs. The sun shone upon it,
  and it glanced in the wind like a flying sunshiny shower. It was a
  tree in shape, with stem and branches, but it was like a spirit of
  water. The sun went in, and it resumed its purplish appearance, the
  twigs still yielding to the wind, but not so visibly to us. The other
  birch trees that were near it looked bright and cheerful, but it was a
  Creation by itself amongst them."

This does not refer to John's Grove, but it may be interesting to
compare the sister's description of a birch tree "tossing in sunshine,"
with the brother's account of a grove of fir trees similarly
moved.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: The visit to Switzerland with Jones in 1790, described in
book vi.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: He took his B. A. degree in January 1791, and immediately
afterwards left Cambridge.--Ed.]


[Footnote I: Going to Forncett Rectory, near Norwich, he spent six weeks
with his sister, and then went to London, where he stayed four
months.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: From the hint given in this passage, it would seem that he
had gone up to London for a few days in 1788. Compare book viii. l. 543,
and note [Footnote o].--Ed.]


[Footnote L: The story of Whittington, hearing the bells ring out the
prosperity in store for him,

  'Turn again, Whittington,
  Thrice Lord Mayor of London,'

is well known.--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Tea-gardens, till well on in this century; now built
over.--Ed.]


[Footnote N: Bedlam, a popular corruption of Bethlehem, a lunatic
hospital, founded in 1246. The old building, with its "carved maniacs at
the gates," was taken down in 1675, and the hospital removed to
Moorfields. The second building--the one to which Wordsworth
refers--was demolished in 1814.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: The London "Monument," erected from a design by Sir
Christopher Wren, on the spot where the great London Fire of 1666
began.--Ed.]


[Footnote P: The historic Tower of London.--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: A theatre in St. John's Street Road, Clerkenwell, erected
in 1765.--Ed.]


[Footnote R: See 'Samson Agonistes', l. 88.--Ed.]


[Footnote S: See 'Hamlet', act I. sc. v. l. 100.--Ed.]


[Footnote T: The story of Mary, "The Maid of Buttermere," as told in the
guidebooks, is as follows:

  'She was the daughter of the inn-keeper at the Fish Inn. She was much
  admired, and many suitors sought her hand in vain. At last a stranger,
  named Hatfield, who called himself the Hon. Colonel Hope, brother of
  Lord Hopetoun, won her heart, and married her. Soon after the
  marriage, he was apprehended on a charge of forgery, surreptitiously
  franking a letter in the name of a Member of Parliament, tried at
  Carlisle, convicted, and hanged. It was discovered during the trial,
  that he had a wife and family, and had fled to these sequestered parts
  to escape the arm of the law.'

See 'Essays on his own Times', by S. T. Coleridge, edited by his
daughter Sara. A melodrama on the story of the Maid of Buttermere was
produced in all the suburban London theatres; and in 1843 a novel was
published in London by Henry Colburn, entitled 'James Hatfield and the
Beauty of Buttermere, a Story of Modern Times', with illustrations by
Robert Cruikshank.--Ed.]


[Footnote U: Compare S. T. C.'s 'Essays on his own Times', p. 585.--Ed.]


[Footnote V: He first went south to Cambridge, in October 1787; and he
left London, at the close of his second visit to Town, in the end of May
1791.--Ed.]


[Footnote W: Compare 'Macbeth', act II. sc. i. l. 58:

  'Thy very stones prate of my whereabout.'

Ed.]


[Footnote X: The Houses of Parliament.--Ed.]


[Footnote Y: See Shakespeare's 'King Henry the Fifth', act IV. sc. iii.
l. 53.--Ed.]


[Footnote Z: Solomon Gesner (or Gessner), a landscape artist, etcher,
and poet, born at Zurich in 1730, died in 1787. His 'Tod Abels' (the
death of Abel), though the poorest of all his works, became a favourite
in Germany, France, and England. It was translated into English by Mary
Collyer, a 12th edition of her version appearing in 1780. As 'The Death
of Abel' was written before 1760, in the line "he who penned, the other
day," Wordsworth probably refers to some new edition of the
translation.--Ed.]


[Footnote a: Edward Young, author of 'Night Thoughts, on Life, Death,
and Immortality'.--Ed.]


[Footnote b: In Argyleshire.--Ed.]


[Footnote c: Permission was given by Henry I. to hold a "Fair" on St.
Bartholomew's day.--Ed.]


[Footnote d: In one of the MS. books in Dorothy Wordsworth's
handwriting, on the outside leather cover of which is written, "May to
December 1802," there are some lines which were evidently dictated to
her, or copied by her, from the numerous experimental efforts of her
brother in connection with this autobiographical poem. They are as
follows:

  'Shall he who gives his days to low pursuits
  Amid the undistinguishable crowd
  Of cities, 'mid the same eternal flow
  Of the same objects, melted and reduced
  To one identity, by differences
  That have no law, no meaning, and no end,
  Shall he feel yearning to those lifeless forms,
  And shall we think that Nature is less kind
  To those, who all day long, through a busy life,
  Have walked within her sight? It cannot be.'

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK EIGHT


RETROSPECT--LOVE OF NATURE LEADING TO LOVE OF MAN


  What sounds are those, Helvellyn, that [1] are heard
  Up to thy summit, through the depth of air
  Ascending, as if distance had the power
  To make the sounds more audible? What crowd
  Covers, or sprinkles o'er, yon village green? [2]                    5
  Crowd seems it, solitary hill! to thee,
  Though but a little family of men,
  Shepherds and tillers of the ground--betimes
  Assembled with their children and their wives,
  And here and there a stranger interspersed.                         10
  They hold a rustic fair--a festival,
  Such as, on this side now, and now on that, [3]
  Repeated through his tributary vales,
  Helvellyn, in the silence of his rest,
  Sees annually, [A] if clouds towards either ocean                   15
  Blown from their favourite resting-place, or mists
  Dissolved, have left him [4] an unshrouded head.
  Delightful day it is for all who dwell
  In this secluded glen, and eagerly
  They give it welcome. [5] Long ere heat of noon,                    20
  From byre or field the kine were brought; the sheep [6]
  Are penned in cotes; the chaffering is begun.
  The heifer lows, uneasy at the voice
  Of a new master; bleat the flocks aloud.
  Booths are there none; a stall or two is here;                      25
  A lame man or a blind, the one to beg,
  The other to make music; hither, too,
  From far, with basket, slung upon her arm,
  Of hawker's wares--books, pictures, combs, and pins--
  Some aged woman finds her way again,                                30
  Year after year, a punctual visitant!
  There also stands a speech-maker by rote,
  Pulling the strings of his boxed raree-show;
  And in the lapse of many years may come [7]
  Prouder itinerant, mountebank, or he                                35
  Whose wonders in a covered wain lie hid.
  But one there is, [8] the loveliest of them all,
  Some sweet lass of the valley, looking out
  For gains, and who that sees her would not buy?
  Fruits of her father's orchard, are her wares,                      40
  And with the ruddy produce, she walks round [9]
  Among the crowd, half pleased with, half ashamed
  Of her new office, [10] blushing restlessly.
  The children now are rich, for the old to-day
  Are generous as the young; and, if content                          45
  With looking on, some ancient wedded pair
  Sit in the shade together, while they gaze,
  "A cheerful smile unbends the wrinkled brow,
  The days departed start again to life,
  And all the scenes of childhood reappear,                           50
  Faint, but more tranquil, like the changing sun
  To him who slept at noon and wakes at eve." [B]
  Thus gaiety and cheerfulness prevail,
  Spreading from young to old, from old to young,
  And no one seems to want his share.--Immense [11]                   55
  Is the recess, the circumambient world
  Magnificent, by which they are embraced:
  They move about upon the soft green turf: [12]
  How little they, they and their doings, seem,
  And all that they can further or obstruct! [13]                     60
  Through utter weakness pitiably dear,
  As tender infants are: and yet how great!
  For all things serve them: them the morning light
  Loves, as it glistens on the silent rocks;
  And them the silent rocks, which now from high                      65
  Look down upon them; the reposing clouds;
  The wild brooks prattling from [14] invisible haunts;
  And old Helvellyn, conscious of the stir
  Which animates this day [15] their calm abode.

  With deep devotion, Nature, did I feel,                             70
  In that enormous City's turbulent world
  Of men and things, what benefit I owed
  To thee, and those domains of rural peace,
  Where to the sense of beauty first my heart
  Was opened; [C] tract more exquisitely fair                         75
  Than that famed paradise often thousand trees, [D]
  Or Gehol's matchless gardens, [E] for delight
  Of the Tartarian dynasty composed
  (Beyond that mighty wall, not fabulous,
  China's stupendous mound) by patient toil                           80
  Of myriads and boon nature's lavish help; [F]
  There, in a clime from widest empire chosen,
  Fulfilling (could enchantment have done more?)
  A sumptuous dream of flowery lawns, with domes
  Of pleasure [G] sprinkled over, shady dells                         85
  For eastern monasteries, sunny mounts
  With temples crested, bridges, gondolas,
  Rocks, dens, and groves of foliage taught to melt
  Into each other their obsequious hues,
  Vanished and vanishing in subtle chase,                             90
  Too fine to be pursued; or standing forth
  In no discordant opposition, strong
  And gorgeous as the colours side by side
  Bedded among rich plumes of tropic birds;
  And mountains over all, embracing all;                              95
  And all the landscape, endlessly enriched
  With waters running, falling, or asleep.

  But lovelier far than this, the paradise
  Where I was reared; [H] in Nature's primitive gifts
  Favoured no less, and more to every sense                          100
  Delicious, seeing that the sun and sky,
  The elements, and seasons as they change,
  Do find a worthy fellow-labourer there--
  Man free, man working for himself, with choice
  Of time, and place, and object; by his wants,                      105
  His comforts, native occupations, cares,
  Cheerfully led to individual ends
  Or social, and still followed by a train
  Unwooed, unthought-of even--simplicity,
  And beauty, and inevitable grace.                                  110

  Yea, when a glimpse of those imperial bowers
  Would to a child be transport over-great,
  When but a half-hour's roam through such a place
  Would leave behind a dance of images,
  That shall break in upon his sleep for weeks;                      115
  Even then the common haunts of the green earth,
  And ordinary interests of man,
  Which they embosom, all without regard
  As both may seem, are fastening on the heart
  Insensibly, each with the other's help.                            120
  For me, when my affections first were led
  From kindred, friends, and playmates, to partake
  Love for the human creature's absolute self,
  That noticeable kindliness of heart
  Sprang out of fountains, there abounding most                      125
  Where sovereign Nature dictated the tasks
  And occupations which her beauty adorned,
  And Shepherds were the men that pleased me first; [I]
  Not such as Saturn ruled 'mid Latian wilds,
  With arts and laws so tempered, that their lives                   130
  Left, even to us toiling in this late day,
  A bright tradition of the golden age; [K]
  Not such as, 'mid Arcadian fastnesses
  Sequestered, handed down among themselves
  Felicity, in Grecian song renowned; [L]                            135
  Nor such as--when an adverse fate had driven,
  From house and home, the courtly band whose fortunes
  Entered, with Shakespeare's genius, the wild woods
  Of Arden--amid sunshine or in shade,
  Culled the best fruits of Time's uncounted hours,                  140
  Ere Phoebe sighed for the false Ganymede; [M]
  Or there where Perdita and Florizel
  Together danced, Queen of the feast, and King; [N]
  Nor such as Spenser fabled. True it is,
  That I had heard (what he perhaps had seen)                        145
  Of maids at sunrise bringing in from far
  Their May-bush [O], and along the streets in flocks
  Parading with a song of taunting rhymes,
  Aimed at the laggards slumbering within doors;
  Had also heard, from those who yet remembered,                     150
  Tales of the May-pole dance, and wreaths that decked
  Porch, door-way, or kirk-pillar; [O] and of youths,
  Each with his maid, before the sun was up,
  By annual custom, issuing forth in troops,
  To drink the waters of some sainted well,                          155
  And hang it round with garlands. Love survives;
  But, for such purpose, flowers no longer grow:
  The times, too sage, perhaps too proud, have dropped
  These lighter graces; and the rural ways
  And manners which my childhood looked upon                         160
  Were the unluxuriant produce of a life
  Intent on little but substantial needs,
  Yet rich in beauty, beauty that was felt.
  But images of danger and distress,
  Man suffering among awful Powers and Forms;                        165
  Of this I heard, and saw enough to make
  Imagination restless; nor was free
  Myself from frequent perils; nor were tales
  Wanting,--the tragedies of former times,
  Hazards and strange escapes, of which the rocks                    170
  Immutable and overflowing streams,
  Where'er I roamed, were speaking monuments.

    Smooth life had flock and shepherd in old time,
  Long springs and tepid winters, on the banks
  Of delicate Galesus [P]; and no less                               175
  Those scattered along Adria's myrtle shores: [Q]
  Smooth life had herdsman, and his snow-white herd
  To triumphs and to sacrificial rites
  Devoted, on the inviolable stream
  Of rich Clitumnus [R]; and the goat-herd lived                     180
  As calmly, underneath the pleasant brows
  Of cool Lucretilis [S], where the pipe was heard
  Of Pan, Invisible God, thrilling the rocks
  With tutelary music, from all harm
  The fold protecting. I myself, mature                              185
  In manhood then, have seen a pastoral tract
  Like one of these, where Fancy might run wild,
  Though under skies less generous, less serene:
  There, for her own delight had Nature framed
  A pleasure-ground, diffused a fair expanse                         190
  Of level pasture, islanded with groves
  And banked with woody risings; but the Plain [T]
  Endless, here opening widely out, and there
  Shut up in lesser lakes or beds of lawn
  And intricate recesses, creek or bay                               195
  Sheltered within a shelter, where at large
  The shepherd strays, a rolling hut his home.
  Thither he comes with spring-time, there abides
  All summer, and at sunrise ye may hear
  His flageolet to liquid notes of love                              200
  Attuned, or sprightly fife resounding far.
  Nook is there none, nor tract of that vast space
  Where passage opens, but the same shall have
  In turn its visitant, telling there his hours
  In unlaborious pleasure, with no task                              205
  More toilsome than to carve a beechen bowl
  For spring or fountain, which the traveller finds,
  When through the region he pursues at will
  His devious course. A glimpse of such sweet life
  I saw when, from the melancholy walls                              210
  Of Goslar, once imperial, I renewed
  My daily walk along that wide champaign, [U]
  That, reaching to her gates, spreads east and west,
  And northwards, from beneath the mountainous verge
  Of the Hercynian forest, [V] Yet, hail to you                      215
  Moors, mountains, headlands, and ye hollow vales,
  Ye long deep channels for the Atlantic's voice, [W]
  Powers of my native region! Ye that seize
  The heart with firmer grasp! Your snows and streams
  Ungovernable, and your terrifying winds,                           220
  That howl so dismally for him who treads
  Companionless your awful solitudes!
  There, 'tis the shepherd's task the winter long
  To wait upon the storms: of their approach
  Sagacious, into sheltering coves he drives                         225
  His flock, and thither from the homestead bears
  A toilsome burden up the craggy ways,
  And deals it out, their regular nourishment
  Strewn on the frozen snow. And when the spring
  Looks out, and all the pastures dance with lambs,                  230
  And when the flock, with warmer weather, climbs
  Higher and higher, him his office leads
  To watch their goings, whatsoever track
  The wanderers choose. For this he quits his home
  At day-spring, and no sooner doth the sun                          235
  Begin to strike him with a fire-like heat,
  Than he lies down upon some shining rock,
  And breakfasts with his dog. When they have stolen,
  As is their wont, a pittance from strict time,
  For rest not needed or exchange of love,                           240
  Then from his couch he starts; and now his feet
  Crush out a livelier fragrance from the flowers
  Of lowly thyme, by Nature's skill enwrought
  In the wild turf: the lingering dews of morn
  Smoke round him, as from hill to hill he hies,                     245
  His staff protending like a hunter's spear,
  Or by its aid leaping from crag to crag,
  And o'er the brawling beds of unbridged streams.
  Philosophy, methinks, at Fancy's call,
  Might deign to follow him through what he does                     250
  Or sees in his day's march; himself he feels,
  In those vast regions where his service lies,
  A freeman, wedded to his life of hope
  And hazard, and hard labour interchanged
  With that majestic indolence so dear                               255
  To native man. A rambling school-boy, thus
  I felt his presence in his own domain,
  As of a lord and master, or a power,
  Or genius, under Nature, under God,
  Presiding; and severest solitude                                   260
  Had more commanding looks when he was there.
  When up the lonely brooks on rainy days
  Angling I went, or trod the trackless hills
  By mists bewildered, [X] suddenly mine eyes
  Have glanced upon him distant a few steps,                         265
  In size a giant, stalking through thick fog,
  His sheep like Greenland bears; or, as he stepped
  Beyond the boundary line of some hill-shadow,
  His form hath flashed upon me, glorified
  By the deep radiance of the setting sun:                           270
  Or him have I descried in distant sky,
  A solitary object and sublime,
  Above all height! like an aerial cross
  Stationed alone upon a spiry rock
  Of the Chartreuse, for worship. [Y] Thus was man                   275
  Ennobled outwardly before my sight,
  And thus my heart was early introduced
  To an unconscious love and reverence
  Of human nature; hence the human form
  To me became an index of delight,                                  280
  Of grace and honour, power and worthiness.
  Meanwhile this creature--spiritual almost
  As those of books, but more exalted far;
  Far more of an imaginative form
  Than the gay Corin of the groves, [Z] who lives                    285
  For his own fancies, or to dance by the hour,
  In coronal, with Phyllis in the midst--[Z]
  Was, for the purposes of kind, a man
  With the most common; husband, father; learned,
  Could teach, admonish; suffered with the rest                      290
  From vice and folly, wretchedness and fear;
  Of this I little saw, cared less for it,
  But something must have felt.
                               Call ye these appearances
  Which I beheld of shepherds in my youth,
  This sanctity of Nature given to man,                              295
  A shadow, a delusion? ye who pore
  On the dead letter, miss the spirit of things;
  Whose truth is not a motion or a shape
  Instinct with vital functions, but a block
  Or waxen image which yourselves have made,                         300
  And ye adore! But blessed be the God
  Of Nature and of Man that this was so;
  That men before my inexperienced eyes
  Did first present themselves thus purified,
  Removed, and to a distance that was fit:                           305
  And so we all of us in some degree
  Are led to knowledge, wheresoever led,
  And howsoever; were it otherwise,
  And we found evil fast as we find good
  In our first years, or think that it is found,                     310
  How could the innocent heart bear up and live!
  But doubly fortunate my lot; not here
  Alone, that something of a better life
  Perhaps was round me than it is the privilege
  Of most to move in, but that first I looked                        315
  At Man through objects that were great or fair;
  First communed with him by their help. And thus
  Was founded a sure safeguard and defence
  Against the weight of meanness, selfish cares,
  Coarse manners, vulgar passions, that beat in                      320
  On all sides from the ordinary world
  In which we traffic. Starting from this point
  I had my face turned toward the truth, began
  With an advantage furnished by that kind
  Of prepossession, without which the soul                           325
  Receives no knowledge that can bring forth good,
  No genuine insight ever comes to her.
  From the restraint of over-watchful eyes
  Preserved, I moved about, year after year,
  Happy, [a] and now most thankful that my walk                      330
  Was guarded from too early intercourse
  With the deformities of crowded life,
  And those ensuing laughters and contempts,
  Self-pleasing, which, if we would wish to think
  With a due reverence on earth's rightful lord,                     335
  Here placed to be the inheritor of heaven,
  Will not permit us; but pursue the mind,
  That to devotion willingly would rise,
  Into the temple and the temple's heart.

    Yet deem not, Friend! that human kind with me                    340
  Thus early took a place pre-eminent;
  Nature herself was, at this unripe time,
  But secondary to my own pursuits
  And animal activities, and all
  Their trivial pleasures; [b] and when these had drooped            345
  And gradually expired, and Nature, prized
  For her own sake, became my joy, even then--[b]
  And upwards through late youth, until not less
  Than two-and-twenty summers had been told--[c]
  Was Man in my affections and regards                               350
  Subordinate to her, her visible forms
  And viewless agencies: a passion, she,
  A rapture often, and immediate love
  Ever at hand; he, only a delight
  Occasional, an accidental grace,                                   355
  His hour being not yet come. Far less had then
  The inferior creatures, beast or bird, attuned
  My spirit to that gentleness of love
  (Though they had long been carefully observed),
  Won from me those minute obeisances                                360
  Of tenderness, [d] which I may number now
  With my first blessings. Nevertheless, on these
  The light of beauty did not fall in vain,
  Or grandeur circumfuse them to no end.

    But when that first poetic faculty                               365
  Of plain Imagination and severe,
  No longer a mute influence of the soul,
  Ventured, at some rash Muse's earnest call,
  To try her strength among harmonious words; [e]
  And to book-notions and the rules of art                           370
  Did knowingly conform itself; there came
  Among the simple shapes of human life
  A wilfulness of fancy and conceit; [e]
  And Nature and her objects beautified
  These fictions, as in some sort, in their turn,                    375
  They burnished her. From touch of this new power
  Nothing was safe: the elder-tree that grew
  Beside the well-known charnel-house had then
  A dismal look: the yew-tree had its ghost,
  That took his station there for ornament:                          380
  The dignities of plain occurrence then
  Were tasteless, and truth's golden mean, a point
  Where no sufficient pleasure could be found.
  Then, if a widow, staggering with the blow
  Of her distress, was known to have turned her steps                385
  To the cold grave in which her husband slept,
  One night, or haply more than one, through pain
  Or half-insensate impotence of mind,
  The fact was caught at greedily, and there
  She must be visitant the whole year through,                       390
  Wetting the turf with never-ending tears.

    Through quaint obliquities I might pursue
  These cravings; when the fox-glove, one by one,
  Upwards through every stage of the tall stem,
  Had shed beside the public way its bells,                          395
  And stood of all dismantled, save the last
  Left at the tapering ladder's top, that seemed
  To bend as doth a slender blade of grass
  Tipped with a rain-drop, Fancy loved to seat,
  Beneath the plant despoiled, but crested still                     400
  With this last relic, soon itself to fall,
  Some vagrant mother, whose arch little ones,
  All unconcerned by her dejected plight,
  Laughed as with rival eagerness their hands
  Gathered the purple cups that round them lay,                      405
  Strewing the turf's green slope.
                                  A diamond light
  (Whene'er the summer sun, declining, smote
  A smooth rock wet with constant springs) was seen
  Sparkling from out a copse-clad bank that rose
  Fronting our cottage. [f] Oft beside the hearth                    410
  Seated, with open door, often and long
  Upon this restless lustre have I gazed,
  That made my fancy restless as itself.
  'Twas now for me a burnished silver shield
  Suspended over a knight's tomb, who lay                            415
  Inglorious, buried in the dusky wood:
  An entrance now into some magic cave
  Or palace built by fairies of the rock;
  Nor could I have been bribed to disenchant
  The spectacle, by visiting the spot.                               420
  Thus wilful Fancy, in no hurtful mood,
  Engrafted far-fetched shapes on feelings bred
  By pure Imagination: busy Power [g]
  She was, and with her ready pupil turned
  Instinctively to human passions, then                              425
  Least understood. Yet, 'mid the fervent swarm
  Of these vagaries, with an eye so rich
  As mine was through the bounty of a grand
  And lovely region, [h] I had forms distinct
  To steady me: each airy thought revolved                           430
  Round a substantial centre, which at once
  Incited it to motion, and controlled.
  I did not pine like one in cities bred,
  As was thy melancholy lot, dear Friend! [i]
  Great Spirit as thou art, in endless dreams                        435
  Of sickliness, disjoining, joining, things
  Without the light of knowledge. Where the harm,
  If, when the woodman languished with disease
  Induced by sleeping nightly on the ground
  Within his sod-built cabin, Indian-wise,                           440
  I called the pangs of disappointed love,
  And all the sad etcetera of the wrong,
  To help him to his grave? Meanwhile the man,
  If not already from the woods retired
  To die at home, was haply as I knew,                               445
  Withering by slow degrees, 'mid gentle airs,
  Birds, running streams, and hills so beautiful
  On golden evenings, while the charcoal pile
  Breathed up its smoke, an image of his ghost
  Or spirit that full soon must take her flight.                     450
  Nor shall we not be tending towards that point
  Of sound humanity to which our Tale
  Leads, though by sinuous ways, if here I shew
  How Fancy, in a season when she wove
  Those slender cords, to guide the unconscious Boy                  455
  For the Man's sake, could feed at Nature's call
  Some pensive musings which might well beseem
  Maturer years.
                A grove there is whose boughs
  Stretch from the western marge of Thurston-mere, [k]
  With length of shade so thick, that whoso glides                   460
  Along the line of low-roofed water, moves
  As in a cloister. Once--while, in that shade
  Loitering, I watched the golden beams of light
  Flung from the setting sun, as they reposed
  In silent beauty on the naked ridge                                465
  Of a high eastern hill--thus flowed my thoughts
  In a pure stream of words fresh from the heart:
  Dear native Regions, [m] wheresoe'er shall close
  My mortal course, there will I think on you;
  Dying, will cast on you a backward look;                           470
  Even as this setting sun (albeit the Vale
  Is no where touched by one memorial gleam)
  Doth with the fond remains of his last power
  Still linger, and a farewell lustre sheds
  On the dear mountain-tops where first he rose.                     475

  Enough of humble arguments; recal,
  My Song! those high emotions which thy voice
  Has heretofore made known; that bursting forth
  Of sympathy, inspiring and inspired,
  When everywhere a vital pulse was felt,                            480
  And all the several frames of things, like stars,
  Through every magnitude distinguishable,
  Shone mutually indebted, or half lost
  Each in the other's blaze, a galaxy
  Of life and glory. In the midst stood Man,                         485
  Outwardly, inwardly contemplated,
  As, of all visible natures, crown, though born
  Of dust, and kindred to the worm; a Being,
  Both in perception and discernment, first
  In every capability of rapture,                                    490
  Through the divine effect of power and love;
  As, more than anything we know, instinct
  With godhead, and, by reason and by will,
  Acknowledging dependency sublime.

  Ere long, the lonely mountains left, I moved,                      495
  Begirt, from day to day, with temporal shapes
  Of vice and folly thrust upon my view,
  Objects of sport, and ridicule, and scorn,
  Manners and characters discriminate,
  And little bustling passions that eclipse,                         500
  As well they might, the impersonated thought,
  The idea, or abstraction of the kind.

  An idler among academic bowers,
  Such was my new condition, as at large
  Has been set forth; [n] yet here the vulgar light                  505
  Of present, actual, superficial life,
  Gleaming through colouring of other times,
  Old usages and local privilege,
  Was welcome, softened, if not solemnised.

  This notwithstanding, being brought more near                      510
  To vice and guilt, forerunning wretchedness
  I trembled,--thought, at times, of human life
  With an indefinite terror and dismay,
  Such as the storms and angry elements
  Had bred in me; but gloomier far, a dim                            515
  Analogy to uproar and misrule,
  Disquiet, danger, and obscurity.

  It might be told (but wherefore speak of things
  Common to all?) that, seeing, I was led
  Gravely to ponder--judging between good                            520
  And evil, not as for the mind's delight
  But for her guidance--one who was to _act_,
  As sometimes to the best of feeble means
  I did, by human sympathy impelled:
  And, through dislike and most offensive pain,                      525
  Was to the truth conducted; of this faith
  Never forsaken, that, by acting well,
  And understanding, I should learn to love
  The end of life, and every thing we know.

  Grave Teacher, stern Preceptress! for at times                     530
  Thou canst put on an aspect most severe;
  London, to thee I willingly return.
  Erewhile my verse played idly with the flowers
  Enwrought upon thy mantle; satisfied
  With that amusement, and a simple look                             535
  Of child-like inquisition now and then
  Cast upwards on thy countenance, to detect
  Some inner meanings which might harbour there.
  But how could I in mood so light indulge,
  Keeping such fresh remembrance of the day,                         540
  When, having thridded the long labyrinth
  Of the suburban villages, I first
  Entered thy vast dominion? [o] On the roof
  Of an itinerant vehicle I sate,
  With vulgar men about me, trivial forms                            545
  Of houses, pavement, streets, of men and things,--
  Mean shapes on every side: but, at the instant,
  When to myself it fairly might be said,
  The threshold now is overpast, (how strange
  That aught external to the living mind                             550
  Should have such mighty sway! yet so it was),
  A weight of ages did at once descend
  Upon my heart; no thought embodied, no
  Distinct remembrances, but weight and power,--
  Power growing under weight: alas! I feel                           555
  That I am trifling: 'twas a moment's pause,--
  All that took place within me came and went
  As in a moment; yet with Time it dwells,
  And grateful memory, as a thing divine.

  The curious traveller, who, from open day,                         560
  Hath passed with torches into some huge cave,
  The Grotto of Antiparos, [p] or the Den
  In old time haunted by that Danish Witch,
  Yordas; [q] he looks around and sees the vault
  Widening on all sides; sees, or thinks he sees,                    565
  Erelong, the massy roof above his head,
  That instantly unsettles and recedes,--
  Substance and shadow, light and darkness, all
  Commingled, making up a canopy
  Of shapes and forms and tendencies to shape                        570
  That shift and vanish, change and interchange
  Like spectres,--ferment silent and sublime!
  That after a short space works less and less,
  Till, every effort, every motion gone,
  The scene before him stands in perfect view                        575
  Exposed, and lifeless as a written book!--
  But let him pause awhile, and look again,
  And a new quickening shall succeed, at first
  Beginning timidly, then creeping fast,
  Till the whole cave, so late a senseless mass,                     580
  Busies the eye with images and forms
  Boldly assembled,--here is shadowed forth
  From the projections, wrinkles, cavities,
  A variegated landscape,--there the shape
  Of some gigantic warrior clad in mail,                             585
  The ghostly semblance of a hooded monk.
  Veiled nun, or pilgrim resting on his staff:
  Strange congregation! yet not slow to meet
  Eyes that perceive through minds that can inspire.

    Even in such sort had I at first been moved,                     590
  Nor otherwise continued to be moved,
  As I explored the vast metropolis,
  Fount of my country's destiny and the world's;
  That great emporium, chronicle at once
  And burial-place of passions, and their home                       595
  Imperial, their chief living residence.

    With strong sensations teeming as it did
  Of past and present, such a place must needs
  Have pleased me, seeking knowledge at that time
  Far less than craving power; yet knowledge came,                   600
  Sought or unsought, and influxes of power
  Came, of themselves, or at her call derived
  In fits of kindliest apprehensiveness,
  From all sides, when whate'er was in itself
  Capacious found, or seemed to find, in me                          605
  A correspondent amplitude of mind;
  Such is the strength and glory of our youth!
  The human nature unto which I felt
  That I belonged, and reverenced with love,
  Was not a punctual presence, but a spirit                          610
  Diffused through time and space, with aid derived
  Of evidence from monuments, erect,
  Prostrate, or leaning towards their common rest
  In earth, the widely scattered wreck sublime
  Of vanished nations, or more clearly drawn                         615
  From books and what they picture and record.

    'Tis true, the history of our native land,
  With those of Greece compared and popular Rome,
  And in our high-wrought modern narratives
  Stript of their harmonising soul, the life                         620
  Of manners and familiar incidents,
  Had never much delighted me. And less
  Than other intellects had mine been used
  To lean upon extrinsic circumstance
  Of record or tradition; but a sense                                625
  Of what in the Great City had been done
  And suffered, and was doing, suffering, still,
  Weighed with me, could support the test of thought;
  And, in despite of all that had gone by,
  Or was departing never to return,                                  630
  There I conversed with majesty and power
  Like independent natures. Hence the place
  Was thronged with impregnations like the Wilds
  In which my early feelings had been nursed--
  Bare hills and valleys, full of caverns, rocks,                    635
  And audible seclusions, dashing lakes,
  Echoes and waterfalls, and pointed crags
  That into music touch the passing wind.
  Here then my young imagination found
  No uncongenial element; could here                                 640
  Among new objects serve or give command,
  Even as the heart's occasions might require,
  To forward reason's else too scrupulous march.
  The effect was, still more elevated views
  Of human nature. Neither vice nor guilt,                           645
  Debasement undergone by body or mind,
  Nor all the misery forced upon my sight,
  Misery not lightly passed, but sometimes scanned
  Most feelingly, could overthrow my trust
  In what we _may_ become; induce belief                             650
  That I was ignorant, had been falsely taught,
  A solitary, who with vain conceits
  Had been inspired, and walked about in dreams.
  From those sad scenes when meditation turned,
  Lo! every thing that was indeed divine                             655
  Retained its purity inviolate,
  Nay brighter shone, by this portentous gloom
  Set off; such opposition as aroused
  The mind of Adam, yet in Paradise
  Though fallen from bliss, when in the East he saw                  660
  [r] Darkness ere day's mid course, and morning light
  More orient in the western cloud, that drew
  O'er the blue firmament a radiant white,
  Descending slow with something heavenly fraught.
  Add also, that among the multitudes                                665
  Of that huge city, oftentimes was seen
  Affectingly set forth, more than elsewhere
  Is possible, the unity of man,
  One spirit over ignorance and vice
  Predominant, in good and evil hearts;                              670
  One sense for moral judgments, as one eye
  For the sun's light. The soul when smitten thus
  By a sublime _idea_, whencesoe'er
  Vouchsafed for union or communion, feeds
  On the pure bliss, and takes her rest with God.                    675
  Thus from a very early age, O Friend!
  My thoughts by slow gradations had been drawn
  To human-kind, and to the good and ill
  Of human life: Nature had led me on;
  And oft amid the "busy hum" I seemed [s]                           680
  To travel independent of her help,
  As if I had forgotten her; but no,
  The world of human-kind outweighed not hers
  In my habitual thoughts; the scale of love,
  Though filling daily, still was light, compared                    685
  With that in which _her_ mighty objects lay.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

  ... which ...

MS. letter to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 2:

  Is yon assembled in the gay green field?

MS. letter to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 3:

  ... family of men,
  Twice twenty with their children and their wives,
  And here and there a stranger interspersed.
  Such show, on this side now, ...

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 4:

  Sees annually; if storms be not abroad
  And mists have left him  ...

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 5:

  It is a summer Festival, a Fair,
  The only one which that secluded Glen
  Has to be proud of ...

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 6:

  ...    heat of noon,
  Behold! the cattle are driven down, the sheep
  That have for this day's traffic been call'd out

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 7:

  ...    visitant!
  The showman with his freight upon his back,
  And once, perchance, in lapse of many years

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 8:

  But one is here,   ...

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 9:

  ... orchard, apples, pears,
  (On this day only to such office stooping)
  She carries in her basket and walks round

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 10:

  ... calling, ...

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 11:

  ... rich, the old man now                    (l. 44)
  Is generous, so gaiety prevails
  Which all partake of, young and old. Immense (l. 55)

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 12:

  ... green field:

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 13:

  ... seem,
  Their herds and flocks about them, they themselves
  And all which they can further ...

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 14:

  The lurking brooks for their ...

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


[Variant 15:

  And the blue sky that roofs ...

MS. to Sir George Beaumont, 1805.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Dorothy Wordsworth alludes to one of these "Fairs" in her
Grasmere Journal, September 2, 1800. Her brothers William and John, with
Coleridge, were all at Dove Cottage at that time.

  "They all went to Stickle Tarn. A very fine, warm, sunny, beautiful
  morning. We walked to the fair. ... It was a lovely moonlight night.
  We talked much about our house on Helvellyn. The moonlight shone only
  upon the village. It did not eclipse the village lights; and the sound
  of dancing and merriment came along the still air. I walked with
  Coleridge and William up the lane and by the church...."

Ed.]


[Footnote B: These lines are from a descriptive Poem--'Malvern
Hills'--by one of Wordsworth's oldest friends, Mr. Joseph Cottle of
Bristol. Cottle was the publisher of the first edition of "Lyrical
Ballads," 1798 (Mr. Carter 1850).--Ed.]


[Footnote C: The district round Cockermouth.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Possibly an allusion to the hanging gardens of Babylon,
said to have been constructed by Nebuchadnezzar for his Median queen.
Berosus in Joseph, _contr. Ap._ I. 19, calls it a hanging _Paradise_
(though Diodorus Siculus uses the term [Greek: kaepos]).--Ed.

The park of the Emperor of China at Gehol, is called 'Van-shoo-yuen',
"the paradise of ten thousand trees." Lord Macartney concludes his
description of that "wonderful garden" by saying,

  "If any place can be said in any respect to have similar features to
  the western park of 'Van-shoo-yuen,' which I have seen this day, it is
  at Lowther Hall in Westmoreland, which (when I knew it many years ago)
  ... I thought might be reckoned ... the finest scene in the British
  dominions."

See Barrow's 'Travels in China', p. 134.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: 150 miles north-east of Pekin. See a description of them in
Sir George Stanton's 'Authentic Account of an Embassy from the King of
Great Britain to the Emperor of China' (from the papers of Lord
Macartney), London, 1797, vol. ii. ch. ii. See also 'Encyclopaedia
Britannica', ninth edition, article "Gehol."--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Compare 'Paradise Lost', iv. l. 242.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: Compare 'Kubla Khan', ll. 1, 2:

  'In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
  A stately pleasure-dome decree.'

Ed.]


[Footnote H: The Hawkshead district.--Ed.]


[Footnote I: Compare 'Michael', vol. ii. p. 215, 'Fidelity', p. 44 of
this vol., etc.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: See Virgil, 'AEneid' viii. 319.--Ed.]


[Footnote L: See Polybius, 'Historiarum libri qui supersunt', vi. 20,
21; and Virgil, 'Eclogue' x. 32.--Ed.]


[Footnote M: See 'As You Like It', act III. scene v.--Ed.]


[Footnote N: See 'The Winter's Tale', act IV. scene iii.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: See Spenser, 'The Shepheard's Calendar (May)'.--Ed.]


[Footnote P: An Italian river in Calabria, famous for its groves and the
fine-fleeced sheep that pastured on its banks. See Virgil, 'Georgics'
iv. 126; Horace, 'Odes' II. vi. 10.--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: The Adriatic Sea. See Acts xxvii. 27.--Ed.]


[Footnote R: An Umbrian river whose waters, when drunk, were supposed to
make oxen white. See Virgil, 'Georgics' ii. 146; Pliny, 'Historia
Naturalis', ii. 103.--Ed.]


[Footnote S: A hill in the Sabine country, overhanging a pleasant
valley. Near it were the house and farm of Horace. See his 'Odes' I.
xvii. 1.--Ed.]


[Footnote T: The plain at the foot of the Harz Mountains, near
Goslar.--Ed.]


[Footnote U: In the Fenwick note to the poem 'Written in Germany', vol.
ii. p. 73, he says that he "walked daily on the ramparts."--Ed.]


[Footnote V: 'Hercynian forest'.--(See Caesar, 'B. G.'  vi. 24, 25.)
According to Caesar it commenced on the east bank of the Rhine,
stretching east and north, its breadth being nine days' journey, and its
length sixty. Strabo (iv. p. 292) included within the Hercynia Silva all
the mountains of southern and central Germany, from the Danube to
Transylvania. Later, it was limited to the mountains round Bohemia and
extending to Hungary. (See Tacitus, 'Germania', 28, 30; and Pliny,
'Historia Naturalis', iv. 25, 28.) A trace of the ancient name is
retained in the 'Harz' mountains, which are clothed everywhere with
conifers, Harz=resin.--Ed.]


[Footnote W: Yewdale, Duddondale, Eskdale, Wastdale, Ennerdale.--Ed.]


[Footnote X: Compare the sonnet in "Yarrow Revisited," etc., No. XI.,
'Suggested at Tyndrum in a Storm'.--Ed.]


[Footnote Y: See book vi. l. 485 and note [Footnote Z, below].--Ed.]


[Footnote Z: Corin=Corydon? the shepherd referred to in the pastorals of
Virgil and Theocritus. Phyllis, see Virgil, 'Eclogue' x. 37, 41.--Ed.]


[Footnote a: While living in Anne Tyson's Cottage at Hawkshead.--Ed.]


[Footnote b: Compare 'Tintern Abbey', vol. ii. p. 54:

       'Nature then,
  To me was all in all, etc.'

Ed.]


[Footnote c: He spent his twenty-second summer at Blois, in
France.--Ed.]


[Footnote d: Compare 'Hart-Leap Well', vol. ii. p. 128, and 'The Green
Linnet', vol. ii. p. 367.--Ed.]


[Footnote e: The 'Evening Walk', and 'Descriptive Sketches', published
1793. See especially the original text of the latter, in the appendix to
vol. 1. p. 309.--Ed.]TWO FOOTNOTES


[Footnote f: It is difficult to say where this "smooth rock wet with
constant springs" and the "copse-clad bank" were. There is no copse-clad
bank fronting Anne Tyson's cottage at Hawkshead. It may have been a rock
on the wooded slope of the rounded hill that rises west of Cowper
Ground, north-west of Hawkshead. A rock "wet with springs" existed
there, till it was quarried for road-metal a few years since. But it is
quite possible that the cottage referred to is Dove Cottage, Grasmere.
In that case the "rock" and "copse-clad bank" may have been on
Loughrigg, or more probably on Silver How. The "summer sun" goes down
behind Silver How, so that it might smite a wet rock either on Hammar
Scar or on the wooded crags above Red Bank. These could be seen from the
window of one of the rooms of Dove Cottage. Seated beside the hearth of
the "half-kitchen and half-parlour fire" in that cottage, and looking
along the passage through the low door, the eye would rest on Hammar
Scar, the wooded hill behind Allan Bank. The context of the poem points
to Hawkshead; but the details of the description suggest the Grasmere
cottage rather than Anne Tyson's.--Ed.]


[Footnote g: See the distinction drawn by Wordsworth between Fancy and
Imagination in the Preface to "Lyrical Ballads" (1800 and subsequent
editions), and embodied in his classification of the Poems.--Ed.]


[Footnote h: Westmoreland.--Ed.]


[Footnote i: See note [Footnote a], book ii. l. 451.--Ed.]


[Footnote k: Coniston lake; see note [Footnote m below] on the following
page.--Ed.]


[Footnote m: The eight lines which follow are a recast, in the blank
verse of 'The Prelude', of the youthful lines entitled 'Extract from the
Conclusion of a Poem, composed in Anticipation of leaving School'. These
were composed in Wordsworth's sixteenth year. As the contrast is
striking, the earlier lines may be transcribed:

  'Dear native regions, I foretell,
  From what I feel at this farewell,
  That, wheresoe'er my steps may tend,
  And whensoe'er my course shall end,
  If in that hour a single tie
  Survive of local sympathy,
  My soul will cast the backward view,
  The longing look alone on you.

  Thus, while the Sun sinks down to rest
  Far in the regions of the west,
  Though to the vale no parting beam
  Be given, not one memorial gleam,
  A lingering light he fondly throws
  On the dear hills where first he rose.'

The Fenwick note to this poem is as follows:

  "The beautiful image with which this poem concludes suggested itself
  to me while I was resting in a boat along with my companions under the
  shade of a magnificent row of sycamores, which then extended their
  branches from the shore of the promontory upon with stands the
  ancient, and at that time the more picturesque, Hall of Coniston."

There is nothing in either poem definitely to connect "Thurstonmere"
with Coniston, although their identity is suggested by the Fenwick note.
I find, however, that Thurston was the ancient name of Coniston; and
this carries us back to the time of the worship of Thor. (See Lewis's
'Topographical Dictionary of England', vol. i. p. 662; also the
'Edinburgh Gazetteer' (1822), articles "Thurston" and "Coniston.") The
site of the grove "on the shore of the promontory" at Coniston Lake is
easily identified, but the grove itself is gone.--Ed.]


[Footnote n: Compare book iii. ll. 30 and 321-26; also book vi, ll. 25
and 95, both text and notes.--Ed.]


[Footnote o: Probably in 1788. Compare book vii. ll. 61-68, and note
[Footnote K].--Ed.]


[Footnote p: A stalactite cave, in a mountain in the south coast of the
island of Antiparos, which is one of the Cyclades. It is six miles from
Paros, was famous in ancient times, and was rediscovered in 1673.--Ed.]


[Footnote q: There is a cave, called Yordas Cave, four and a half miles
from Ingleton in Lonsdale, Yorkshire. It is a limestone cavern, rich in
stalactites, like the grotto of Antiparos; and is at the foot of the
slopes of Gragreth, formerly called Greg-roof. It gets its name from a
traditional giant 'Yordas'; some of its recesses being called "Yordas'
bed-chamber," "Yordas' oven," etc. See Allen's 'County of York', iii. p.
359; also Bigland's "Yorkshire" in 'The Beauties of England and Wales',
vol. xvi. p. 735, and Murray's 'Handbook for Yorkshire', p. 392.--Ed.]


[Footnote r: From Milton, 'Paradise Lost', book xi. 1. 204:

  'Why in the East
  Darkness ere day's mid-course, and Morning light
  More orient in yon Western Cloud, that draws
  O'er the blue Firmament a radiant white,
  And slow descends, with something heav'nly fraught?'

Ed.]


[Footnote s: See 'L'Allegro', l. 118.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK NINTH


RESIDENCE IN FRANCE


  Even as a river,--partly (it might seem)
  Yielding to old remembrances, and swayed
  In part by fear to shape a way direct,
  That would engulph him soon in the ravenous sea--
  Turns, and will measure back his course, far back,                   5
  Seeking the very regions which he crossed
  In his first outset; so have we, my Friend!
  Turned and returned with intricate delay.
  Or as a traveller, who has gained the brow
  Of some aerial Down, while there he halts                           10
  For breathing-time, is tempted to review
  The region left behind him; and, if aught
  Deserving notice have escaped regard,
  Or been regarded with too careless eye,
  Strives, from that height, with one and yet one more                15
  Last look, to make the best amends he may:
  So have we lingered. Now we start afresh
  With courage, and new hope risen on our toil
  Fair greetings to this shapeless eagerness,
  Whene'er it comes! needful in work so long,                         20
  Thrice needful to the argument which now
  Awaits us! Oh, how much unlike the past!

   Free as a colt at pasture on the hill,
  I ranged at large, through London's wide domain,
  Month after month [A]. Obscurely did I live,                        25
  Not seeking frequent intercourse with men,
  By literature, or elegance, or rank,
  Distinguished. Scarcely was a year thus spent [A]
  Ere I forsook the crowded solitude,
  With less regret for its luxurious pomp,                            30
  And all the nicely-guarded shows of art,
  Than for the humble book-stalls in the streets,
  Exposed to eye and hand where'er I turned.

    France lured me forth; the realm that I had crossed
  So lately [B], journeying toward the snow-clad Alps.                35
  But now, relinquishing the scrip and staff,
  And all enjoyment which the summer sun
  Sheds round the steps of those who meet the day
  With motion constant as his own, I went
  Prepared to sojourn in a pleasant town, [C]                         40
  Washed by the current of the stately Loire.

    Through Paris lay my readiest course, and there
  Sojourning a few days, I visited,
  In haste, each spot of old or recent fame,
  The latter chiefly; from the field of Mars                          45
  Down to the suburbs of St. Antony,
  And from Mont Martyr southward to the Dome
  Of Genevieve [D]. In both her clamorous Halls,
  The National Synod and the Jacobins,
  I saw the Revolutionary Power                                       50
  Toss like a ship at anchor, rocked by storms; [E]
  The Arcades I traversed, in the Palace huge
  Of Orleans; [F] coasted round and round the line
  Of Tavern, Brothel, Gaming-house, and Shop,
  Great rendezvous of worst and best, the walk                        55
  Of all who had a purpose, or had not;
  I stared and listened, with a stranger's ears,
  To Hawkers and Haranguers, hubbub wild!
  And hissing Factionists with ardent eyes,
  In knots, or pairs, or single. Not a look                           60
  Hope takes, or Doubt or Fear is forced to wear,
  But seemed there present; and I scanned them all,
  Watched every gesture uncontrollable,
  Of anger, and vexation, and despite,
  All side by side, and struggling face to face,                      65
  With gaiety and dissolute idleness.

    Where silent zephyrs sported with the dust
  Of the Bastille, I sate in the open sun,
  And from the rubbish gathered up a stone,
  And pocketed the relic, [G] in the guise                            70
  Of an enthusiast; yet, in honest truth,
  I looked for something that I could not find,
  Affecting more emotion than I felt;
  For 'tis most certain, that these various sights,
  However potent their first shock, with me                           75
  Appeared to recompense the traveller's pains
  Less than the painted Magdalene of Le Brun, [H]
  A beauty exquisitely wrought, with hair
  Dishevelled, gleaming eyes, and rueful cheek
  Pale and bedropped with everflowing tears.                          80

  But hence to my more permanent abode
  I hasten; there, by novelties in speech,
  Domestic manners, customs, gestures, looks,
  And all the attire of ordinary life,
  Attention was engrossed; and, thus amused,                          85
  I stood, 'mid those concussions, unconcerned,
  Tranquil almost, and careless as a flower
  Glassed in a green-house, or a parlour shrub
  That spreads its leaves in unmolested peace,
  While every bush and tree, the country through,                     90
  Is shaking to the roots: indifference this
  Which may seem strange: but I was unprepared
  With needful knowledge, had abruptly passed
  Into a theatre, whose stage was filled
  And busy with an action far advanced.                               95
  Like others, I had skimmed, and sometimes read
  With care, the master pamphlets of the day;
  Nor wanted such half-insight as grew wild
  Upon that meagre soil, helped out by talk
  And public news; but having never seen                             100
  A chronicle that might suffice to show
  Whence the main organs of the public power
  Had sprung, their transmigrations, when and how
  Accomplished, giving thus unto events
  A form and body; all things were to me                             105
  Loose and disjointed, and the affections left
  Without a vital interest. At that time,
  Moreover, the first storm was overblown,
  And the strong hand of outward violence
  Locked up in quiet. For myself, I fear                             110
  Now in connection with so great a theme
  To speak (as I must be compelled to do)
  Of one so unimportant; night by night
  Did I frequent the formal haunts of men,
  Whom, in the city, privilege of birth                              115
  Sequestered from the rest, societies
  Polished in arts, and in punctilio versed;
  Whence, and from deeper causes, all discourse
  Of good and evil of the time was shunned
  With scrupulous care; but these restrictions soon                  120
  Proved tedious, and I gradually withdrew
  Into a noisier world, and thus ere long
  Became a patriot; and my heart was all
  Given to the people, and my love was theirs.

  A band of military Officers,                                       125
  Then stationed in the city, were the chief
  Of my associates: some of these wore swords
  That had been seasoned in the wars, and all
  Were men well-born; the chivalry of France.
  In age and temper differing, they had yet                          130
  One spirit ruling in each heart; alike
  (Save only one, hereafter to be named) [I]
  Were bent upon undoing what was done:
  This was their rest and only hope; therewith
  No fear had they of bad becoming worse,                            135
  For worst to them was come; nor would have stirred,
  Or deemed it worth a moment's thought to stir,
  In any thing, save only as the act
  Looked thitherward. One, reckoning by years,
  Was in the prime of manhood, and erewhile                          140
  He had sate lord in many tender hearts;
  Though heedless of such honours now, and changed:
  His temper was quite mastered by the times,
  And they had blighted him, had eaten away
  The beauty of his person, doing wrong                              145
  Alike to body and to mind: his port,
  Which once had been erect and open, now
  Was stooping and contracted, and a face,
  Endowed by Nature with her fairest gifts
  Of symmetry and light and bloom, expressed,                        150
  As much as any that was ever seen,
  A ravage out of season, made by thoughts
  Unhealthy and vexatious. With the hour,
  That from the press of Paris duly brought
  Its freight of public news, the fever came,                        155
  A punctual visitant, to shake this man,
  Disarmed his voice and fanned his yellow cheek
  Into a thousand colours; while he read,
  Or mused, his sword was haunted by his touch
  Continually, like an uneasy place                                  160
  In his own body. 'Twas in truth an hour
  Of universal ferment; mildest men
  Were agitated; and commotions, strife
  Of passion and opinion, filled the walls
  Of peaceful houses with unquiet sounds.                            165
  The soil of common life, was, at that time,
  Too hot to tread upon. Oft said I then,
  And not then only, "What a mockery this
  Of history, the past and that to come!
  Now do I feel how all men are deceived,                            170
  Reading of nations and their works, in faith,
  Faith given to vanity and emptiness;
  Oh! laughter for the page that would reflect
  To future times the face of what now is!"
  The land all swarmed with passion, like a plain                    175
  Devoured by locusts,--Carra, Gorsas,--add
  A hundred other names, forgotten now, [K]
  Nor to be heard of more; yet, they were powers,
  Like earthquakes, shocks repeated day by day,
  And felt through every nook of town and field.                     180

  Such was the state of things. Meanwhile the chief
  Of my associates stood prepared for flight
  To augment the band of emigrants in arms [L]
  Upon the borders of the Rhine, and leagued
  With foreign foes mustered for instant war.                        185
  This was their undisguised intent, and they
  Were waiting with the whole of their desires
  The moment to depart.
                       An Englishman,
  Born in a land whose very name appeared
  To license some unruliness of mind;                                190
  A stranger, with youth's further privilege,
  And the indulgence that a half-learnt speech
  Wins from the courteous; I, who had been else
  Shunned and not tolerated, freely lived
  With these defenders of the Crown, and talked,                     195
  And heard their notions; nor did they disdain
  The wish to bring me over to their cause.

    But though untaught by thinking or by books
  To reason well of polity or law,
  And nice distinctions, then on every tongue,                       200
  Of natural rights and civil; and to acts
  Of nations and their passing interests,
  (If with unworldly ends and aims compared)
  Almost indifferent, even the historian's tale
  Prizing but little otherwise than I prized                         205
  Tales of the poets, as it made the heart
  Beat high, and filled the fancy with fair forms,
  Old heroes and their sufferings and their deeds;
  Yet in the regal sceptre, and the pomp
  Of orders and degrees, I nothing found                             210
  Then, or had ever, even in crudest youth,
  That dazzled me, but rather what I mourned
  And ill could brook, beholding that the best
  Ruled not, and feeling that they ought to rule.

    For, born in a poor district, and which yet                      215
  Retaineth more of ancient homeliness,
  Than any other nook of English ground,
  It was my fortune scarcely to have seen,
  Through the whole tenor of my school-day time,
  The face of one, who, whether boy or man,                          220
  Was vested with attention or respect
  Through claims of wealth or blood; nor was it least
  Of many benefits, in later years
  Derived from academic institutes
  And rules, that they held something up to view                     225
  Of a Republic, where all stood thus far
  Upon equal ground; that we were brothers all
  In honour, as in one community,
  Scholars and gentlemen; where, furthermore,
  Distinction open lay to all that came,                             230
  And wealth and titles were in less esteem
  Than talents, worth, and prosperous industry.
  Add unto this, subservience from the first
  To presences of God's mysterious power
  Made manifest in Nature's sovereignty,                             235
  And fellowship with venerable books,
  To sanction the proud workings of the soul,
  And mountain liberty. It could not be
  But that one tutored thus should look with awe
  Upon the faculties of man, receive                                 240
  Gladly the highest promises, and hail,
  As best, the government of equal rights
  And individual worth. And hence, O Friend!
  If at the first great outbreak I rejoiced
  Less than might well befit my youth, the cause                     245
  In part lay here, that unto me the events
  Seemed nothing out of nature's certain course,
  A gift that was come rather late than soon.
  No wonder, then, if advocates like these,
  Inflamed by passion, blind with prejudice,                         250
  And stung with injury, at this riper day,
  Were impotent to make my hopes put on
  The shape of theirs, my understanding bend
  In honour to their honour: zeal, which yet
  Had slumbered, now in opposition burst                             255
  Forth like a Polar summer: every word
  They uttered was a dart, by counter-winds
  Blown back upon themselves; their reason seemed
  Confusion-stricken by a higher power
  Than human understanding, their discourse                          260
  Maimed, spiritless; and, in their weakness strong,
  I triumphed.

               Meantime, day by day, the roads
  Were crowded with the bravest youth of France, [M]
  And all the promptest of her spirits, linked
  In gallant soldiership, and posting on                             265
  To meet the war upon her frontier bounds.
  Yet at this very moment do tears start
  Into mine eyes: I do not say I weep--
  I wept not then,--but tears have dimmed my sight,
  In memory of the farewells of that time,                           270
  Domestic severings, female fortitude
  At dearest separation, patriot love
  And self-devotion, and terrestrial hope,
  Encouraged with a martyr's confidence;
  Even files of strangers merely seen but once,                      275
  And for a moment, men from far with sound
  Of music, martial tunes, and banners spread,
  Entering the city, here and there a face,
  Or person singled out among the rest,
  Yet still a stranger and beloved as such;                          280
  Even by these passing spectacles my heart
  Was oftentimes uplifted, and they seemed
  Arguments sent from Heaven to prove the cause
  Good, pure, which no one could stand up against,
  Who was not lost, abandoned, selfish, proud,                       285
  Mean, miserable, wilfully depraved,
  Hater perverse of equity and truth.

    Among that band of Officers was one,
  Already hinted at, [N] of other mould--
  A patriot, thence rejected by the rest,                            290
  And with an oriental loathing spurned,
  As of a different caste. A meeker man
  Than this lived never, nor a more benign,
  Meek though enthusiastic. Injuries
  Made _him_ more gracious, and his nature then                      295
  Did breathe its sweetness out most sensibly,
  As aromatic flowers on Alpine turf,
  When foot hath crushed them. He through the events
  Of that great change wandered in perfect faith,
  As through a book, an old romance, or tale                         300
  Of Fairy, or some dream of actions wrought
  Behind the summer clouds. By birth he ranked
  With the most noble, but unto the poor
  Among mankind he was in service bound,
  As by some tie invisible, oaths professed                          305
  To a religious order. Man he loved
  As man; and, to the mean and the obscure,
  And all the homely in their homely works,
  Transferred a courtesy which had no air
  Of condescension; but did rather seem                              310
  A passion and a gallantry, like that
  Which he, a soldier, in his idler day
  Had paid to woman: somewhat vain he was,
  Or seemed so, yet it was not vanity,
  But fondness, and a kind of radiant joy                            315
  Diffused around him, while he was intent
  On works of love or freedom, or revolved
  Complacently the progress of a cause,
  Whereof he was a part: yet this was meek
  And placid, and took nothing from the man                          320
  That was delightful. Oft in solitude
  With him did I discourse about the end
  Of civil government, and its wisest forms;
  Of ancient loyalty, and chartered rights,
  Custom and habit, novelty and change;                              325
  Of self-respect, and virtue in the few
  For patrimonial honour set apart,
  And ignorance in the labouring multitude.
  For he, to all intolerance indisposed,
  Balanced these contemplations in his mind;                         330
  And I, who at that time was scarcely dipped
  Into the turmoil, bore a sounder judgment
  Than later days allowed; carried about me,
  With less alloy to its integrity,
  The experience of past ages, as, through help                      335
  Of books and common life, it makes sure way
  To youthful minds, by objects over near
  Not pressed upon, nor dazzled or misled
  By struggling with the crowd for present ends.

    But though not deaf, nor obstinate to find                       340
  Error without excuse upon the side
  Of them who strove against us, more delight
  We took, and let this freely be confessed,
  In painting to ourselves the miseries
  Of royal courts, and that voluptuous life                          345
  Unfeeling, where the man who is of soul
  The meanest thrives the most; where dignity,
  True personal dignity, abideth not;
  A light, a cruel, and vain world cut off
  From the natural inlets of just sentiment,                         350
  From lowly sympathy and chastening truth;
  Where good and evil interchange their names,
  And thirst for bloody spoils abroad is paired
  With vice at home. We added dearest themes--
  Man and his noble nature, as it is                                 355
  The gift which God has placed within his power,
  His blind desires and steady faculties
  Capable of clear truth, the one to break
  Bondage, the other to build liberty
  On firm foundations, making social life,                           360
  Through knowledge spreading and imperishable,
  As just in regulation, and as pure
  As individual in the wise and good.

    We summoned up the honourable deeds
  Of ancient Story, thought of each bright spot,                     365
  That would be found in all recorded time,
  Of truth preserved and error passed away;
  Of single spirits that catch the flame from Heaven,
  And how the multitudes of men will feed
  And fan each other; thought of sects, how keen                     370
  They are to put the appropriate nature on,
  Triumphant over every obstacle
  Of custom, language, country, love, or hate,
  And what they do and suffer for their creed;
  How far they travel, and how long endure;                          375
  How quickly mighty Nations have been formed,
  From least beginnings; how, together locked
  By new opinions, scattered tribes have made
  One body, spreading wide as clouds in heaven.
  To aspirations then of our own minds                               380
  Did we appeal; and, finally, beheld
  A living confirmation of the whole
  Before us, in a people from the depth
  Of shameful imbecility uprisen,
  Fresh as the morning star. Elate we looked                         385
  Upon their virtues; saw, in rudest men,
  Self-sacrifice the firmest; generous love,
  And continence of mind, and sense of right,
  Uppermost in the midst of fiercest strife.

    Oh, sweet it is, in academic groves,                             390
  Or such retirement, Friend! as we have known
  In the green dales beside our Rotha's stream,
  Greta, or Derwent, or some nameless rill,
  To ruminate, with interchange of talk,
  On rational liberty, and hope in man,                              395
  Justice and peace. But far more sweet such toil--
  Toil, say I, for it leads to thoughts abstruse--
  If nature then be standing on the brink
  Of some great trial, and we hear the voice
  Of one devoted, one whom circumstance                              400
  Hath called upon to embody his deep sense
  In action, give it outwardly a shape,
  And that of benediction, to the world.
  Then doubt is not, and truth is more than truth,--
  A hope it is, and a desire; a creed                                405
  Of zeal, by an authority Divine
  Sanctioned, of danger, difficulty, or death.
  Such conversation, under Attic shades,
  Did Dion hold with Plato; [O] ripened thus
  For a Deliverer's glorious task,--and such                         410
  He, on that ministry already bound,
  Held with Eudemus and Timonides, [P]
  Surrounded by adventurers in arms,
  When those two vessels with their daring freight,
  For the Sicilian Tyrant's overthrow,                               415
  Sailed from Zacynthus,--philosophic war,
  Led by Philosophers. [Q] With harder fate,
  Though like ambition, such was he, O Friend!
  Of whom I speak. So Beaupuis (let the name
  Stand near the worthiest of Antiquity)                             420
  Fashioned his life; and many a long discourse,
  With like persuasion honoured, we maintained:
  He, on his part, accoutred for the worst.
  He perished fighting, in supreme command,
  Upon the borders of the unhappy Loire,                             425
  For liberty, against deluded men,
  His fellow country-men; and yet most blessed
  In this, that he the fate of later times
  Lived not to see, nor what we now behold,
  Who have as ardent hearts as he had then.                          430

  Along that very Loire, with festal mirth
  Resounding at all hours, and innocent yet
  Of civil slaughter, was our frequent walk;
  Or in wide forests of continuous shade,
  Lofty and over-arched, with open space                             435
  Beneath the trees, clear footing many a mile--
  A solemn region. Oft amid those haunts,
  From earnest dialogues I slipped in thought,
  And let remembrance steal to other times,
  When, o'er those interwoven roots, moss-clad,                      440
  And smooth as marble or a waveless sea,
  Some Hermit, from his cell forth-strayed, might pace
  In sylvan meditation undisturbed;
  As on the pavement of a Gothic church
  Walks a lone Monk, when service hath expired,                      445
  In peace and silence. But if e'er was heard,--
  Heard, though unseen,--a devious traveller,
  Retiring or approaching from afar
  With speed and echoes loud of trampling hoofs
  From the hard floor reverberated, then                             450
  It was Angelica [R] thundering through the woods
  Upon her palfrey, or that gentle maid
  Erminia, [S] fugitive as fair as she.
  Sometimes methought I saw a pair of knights
  Joust underneath the trees, that as in storm                       455
  Rocked high above their heads; anon, the din
  Of boisterous merriment, and music's roar,
  In sudden proclamation, burst from haunt
  Of Satyrs in some viewless glade, with dance
  Rejoicing o'er a female in the midst,                              460
  A mortal beauty, their unhappy thrall.
  The width of those huge forests, unto me
  A novel scene, did often in this way
  Master my fancy while I wandered on
  With that revered companion. And sometimes--465
  When to a convent in a meadow green,
  By a brook-side, we came, a roofless pile,
  And not by reverential touch of Time
  Dismantled, but by violence abrupt--
  In spite of those heart-bracing colloquies,                        470
  In spite of real fervour, and of that
  Less genuine and wrought up within myself--
  I could not but bewail a wrong so harsh,
  And for the Matin-bell to sound no more
  Grieved, and the twilight taper, and the cross                     475
  High on the topmost pinnacle, a sign
  (How welcome to the weary traveller's eyes!)
  Of hospitality and peaceful rest.
  And when the partner of those varied walks
  Pointed upon occasion to the site                                  480
  Of Romorentin, home of ancient kings, [T]
  To the imperial edifice of Blois, [U]
  Or to that rural castle, name now slipped
  From my remembrance, where a lady lodged, [V]
  By the first Francis wooed, and bound to him                       485
  In chains of mutual passion, from the tower,
  As a tradition of the country tells,
  Practised to commune with her royal knight
  By cressets and love-beacons, intercourse
  'Twixt her high-seated residence and his                           490
  Far off at Chambord on the plain beneath; [W]
  Even here, though less than with the peaceful house
  Religious, 'mid those frequent monuments
  Of Kings, their vices and their better deeds,
  Imagination, potent to inflame                                     495
  At times with virtuous wrath and noble scorn,
  Did also often mitigate the force
  Of civic prejudice, the bigotry,
  So call it, of a youthful patriot's mind;
  And on these spots with many gleams I looked                       500
  Of chivalrous delight. Yet not the less,
  Hatred of absolute rule, where will of one
  Is law for all, and of that barren pride
  In them who, by immunities unjust,
  Between the sovereign and the people stand,                        505
  His helper and not theirs, laid stronger hold
  Daily upon me, mixed with pity too
  And love; for where hope is, there love will be
  For the abject multitude. And when we chanced
  One day to meet a hunger-bitten girl,                              510
  Who crept along fitting her languid gait
  Unto a heifer's motion, by a cord
  Tied to her arm, and picking thus from the lane
  Its sustenance, while the girl with pallid hands
  Was busy knitting in a heartless mood                              515
  Of solitude, and at the sight my friend
  In agitation said, "'Tis against 'that'
  That we are fighting," I with him believed
  That a benignant spirit was abroad
  Which might not be withstood, that poverty                         520
  Abject as this would in a little time
  Be found no more, that we should see the earth
  Unthwarted in her wish to recompense
  The meek, the lowly, patient child of toil,
  All institutes for ever blotted out                                525
  That legalised exclusion, empty pomp
  Abolished, sensual state and cruel power,
  Whether by edict of the one or few;
  And finally, as sum and crown of all,
  Should see the people having a strong hand                         530
  In framing their own laws; whence better days
  To all mankind. But, these things set apart,
  Was not this single confidence enough
  To animate the mind that ever turned
  A thought to human welfare? That henceforth                        535
  Captivity by mandate without law
  Should cease; and open accusation lead
  To sentence in the hearing of the world,
  And open punishment, if not the air
  Be free to breathe in, and the heart of man                        540
  Dread nothing. From this height I shall not stoop
  To humbler matter that detained us oft
  In thought or conversation, public acts,
  And public persons, and emotions wrought
  Within the breast, as ever-varying winds                           545
  Of record or report swept over us;
  But I might here, instead, repeat a tale, [X]
  Told by my Patriot friend, of sad events,
  That prove to what low depth had struck the roots,
  How widely spread the boughs, of that old tree                     550
  Which, as a deadly mischief, and a foul
  And black dishonour, France was weary of.

    Oh, happy time of youthful lovers, (thus
  The story might begin). Oh, balmy time,
  In which a love-knot, on a lady's brow,                            555
  Is fairer than the fairest star in Heaven! [Y]
  So might--and with that prelude _did_ begin
  The record; and, in faithful verse, was given
  The doleful sequel.

                        But our little bark
  On a strong river boldly hath been launched;                       560
  And from the driving current should we turn
  To loiter wilfully within a creek,
  Howe'er attractive, Fellow voyager!
  Would'st thou not chide?  Yet deem not my pains lost:
  For Vaudracour and Julia (so were named                            565
  The ill-fated pair) in that plain tale will draw
  Tears from the hearts of others, when their own
  Shall beat no more.  Thou, also, there may'st read,
  At leisure, how the enamoured youth was driven,
  By public power abased, to fatal crime,                            570
  Nature's rebellion against monstrous law;
  How, between heart and heart, oppression thrust
  Her mandates, severing whom true love had joined,
  Harassing both; until he sank and pressed
  The couch his fate had made for him; supine,                       575
  Save when the stings of viperous remorse,
  Trying their strength, enforced him to start up,
  Aghast and prayerless. Into a deep wood
  He fled, to shun the haunts of human kind;
  There dwelt, weakened in spirit more and more;                     580
  Nor could the voice of Freedom, which through France
  Full speedily resounded, public hope,
  Or personal memory of his own worst wrongs,
  Rouse him; but, hidden in those gloomy shades,
  His days he wasted,--an imbecile mind. [Z]                         585


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: This must either mean a year from the time at which he took
his degree at Cambridge, or it is inaccurate as to date. He graduated in
January 1791, and left Brighton for Paris in November 1791. In London he
only spent four months, the February, March, April, and May of 1791.
Then followed the Welsh tour with Jones, and his return to Cambridge in
September 1791.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: With Jones in the previous year, 1790.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Orleans.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: The Champ de Mars is in the west, the Rue du Faubourg St.
Antoine (the old suburb of St. Antony) in the east, Montmartre in the
north, and the dome of St. Genevieve, commonly called the Pantheon, in
the south of Paris.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: The clergy, noblesse, and the 'tiers etat' met at Notre
Dame on the 4th May 1789. On the following day, at Versailles, the
'tiers etat' assumed the title of the 'National Assembly'--constituting
themselves the sovereign power--and invited others to join them. The
club of the Jacobins was instituted the same year. It leased for itself
the hall of the Jacobins' convent: hence the name.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: The Palais Royal, built by Cardinal Richelieu in 1636,
presented by Louis XIV. to his brother, the Duke of Orleans, and
thereafter the property of the house of Orleans (hence the name). The
"arcades" referred to were removed in 1830, and the brilliant 'Galerie
d'Orleans' built in their place.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: On the 14th July 1789, the Bastille was taken, and
destroyed by the Revolutionists. The stones were used, for the most
part, in the construction of the Pont de la Concorde.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: Charles Lebrun, Court painter to Louis XIV. of France
(1619-1690)--Ed.]


[Footnote I: The Republican general, Michel Beaupuy. See p. 302
[Footnote N below], and the note upon him by Mons. Emile Legouis of
Lyons, in the appendix [Note VII] to this volume, p. 401.--Ed.]


[Footnote K:  Carra and Gorsas were journalist deputies in the first
year of the French Republic. Gorsas was the first of the deputies who
died on the scaffold. Carlyle thus refers to them, and to the "hundred
other names forgotten now," in his 'French Revolution' (vol. iii. book
i. chap. 7):

  "The convention is getting chosen--really in a decisive spirit. Some
  two hundred of our best Legislators may be re-elected, the Mountain
  bodily. Robespierre, with Mayor Petion, Buzot, Curate Gregoire and
  some threescore Old Constituents; though we men had only _thirty
  voices._ All these and along with them friends long known to the
  Revolutionary fame: Camille Desmoulins, though he stutters in speech,
  Manuel Tallein and Company; Journalists Gorsas, Carra, Mersier, Louvet
  of _Faubias_; Clootz, Speaker of Mankind, Collet d'Herbois, tearing a
  passion to rags; Fahre d'Egalantine Speculative Pamphleteer; Legendre,
  the solid Butcher; nay Marat though rural France can hardly believe
  it, or even believe there is a Marat, except in print." Ed.]


[Footnote L: Many of the old French Noblesse, and other supporters of
Monarchy, fled across the Rhine, and with thousands of emigres formed a
special Legion, which co-operated with the German army under the Emperor
Leopold and the King of Prussia.--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Compare book vi. l. 345, etc.--Ed.]


[Footnote N: Beaupuy. See p. 297 [Footnote I, above]:

  "Save only one, hereafter to be named," [Line 132]

and the note on Beaupuy, in the appendix [Note VII] to this volume, p.
401.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: Compare Wordsworth's poem 'Dion', in volume vi. of this
edition.--Ed.]


[Footnote P: When Plato visited Syracuse, in the reign of Dionysius,
Dion became his disciple, and induced Dionysius to invite Plato a second
time to Syracuse. But neither Plato nor Dion could succeed in their
efforts to influence and elevate Dionysius. Dion withdrew to Athens, and
lived in close intimacy with Plato, and with Speusippus. The latter
urged him to return, and deliver Sicily from the tyrant Dionysius, who
had become unpopular in the island. Dion got some of the Syracusan
exiles in Greece to join him, and "sailed from Zacynthus," with two
merchant ships, and about 800 troops. He took Syracuse, and became
dictator of the district. But--as was the case with the tyrants of the
French Revolution who took the place of those of the old regime (record
later on in 'The Prelude')--the Syracusans found that they had only
exchanged one form of rigour for another. It is thus that Plutarch
refers to the occurrence.

  "Many statesmen and philosophers assisted him (_i. e._ Dion); "as for
  instance, Eudemus, the Cyprian, on whose death Aristotle wrote his
  dialogue of the Soul, and Timonides the Leucadian."

(See Plutarch's 'Dion'.) Timonides wrote an account of Dion's campaign
in Sicily in certain letters to Speusippus, which are referred to both
by Plutarch and by Diogenes Laertius,--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: See the previous note [Footnote P directly above].--Ed.]


[Footnote R: See the 'Orlando Furioso' of Ariosto, canto i.:

  'La donna il palafreno a dietro volta,
  E per la selva a tutta briglia il caccia;
  Ne per la rara piu, che per la folta,
  La piu sicura e miglior via procaccia.

  The lady turned her palfrey round,
  And through the forest drove him on amain;
  Nor did she choose the glade before the thickest wood,
  Riding the safest ever, and the better way.'

Ed.]


[Footnote S: See the 'Gerusalemme Liberata' of Tasso, canto vi. Erminia
is the heroine of 'Jerusalem Delivered'. An account of her flight occurs
at the opening of the seventh canto.--Ed.]


[Footnote T:

  "_Rivus Romentini_, petite ville du Blaisois, et capitale de la
  Sologne, aujourd'hui sous-prefecture du depart. de Loir-et-Cher."

It was taken in 1356 and in 1429 by the English, in 1562 by the
Catholics, in 1567 by the Calvinists, and in 1589 by the Royalists.

  "Henri IV. l'erigea en comte pour sa maitresse Charlotte des Essarts,
  1560. Francois I. y rendit un edit celebre qui attribuait aux prelats
  la connaissance du crime d'heresie, et la repression des assemblees
  illicites."

('Dictionnaire Historique de la France', par Ludovic Lalaune. Paris,
1872.)--Ed.]


[Footnote U: Blois,

  "Louis XII., qui etait ne a Blois, y sejourna souvent, et
  reconstruisit completement le chateau, ou la cour habita frequemment
  au XVI'e. siecle."

('Dict. Histor. de la France', Lalaune.) The town is full of historical
reminiscences of Louis XII., Francis I., Henry III., and Catherine and
Mary de Medici. Wordsworth went from Orleans to Blois, in the spring of
1792.--Ed.]


[Footnote V: Claude, the daughter of Louis XII.--Ed.]


[Footnote W: Chambord;

  "celebre chateau du Blaisois (Loir-et-Cher), construit par Francois
  I., sur l'emplacement d'une maison de plaisance des comtes de Blois.
  Donne par Louis XV. a son beau-pere Stanislas, puis au Marechal de
  Saxe, il revint ensuit a la couronne; et en 1777 Louis XVI. en accorda
  la jouissance a la famille de Polignac."

(Lalaune.)

A national subscription was got up in the 'twenties, under Charles X.,
to present the chateau to the posthumous son of the Duc de Berry, who
afterwards became known as the Comte de Chambord, or Henri V.--Ed.]


[Footnote X: The tale of 'Vaudracour and Julia'. (Mr. Carter, 1850.)]


[Footnote Y: The previous four lines are the opening ones of the poem
'Vaudracour and Julia'. (See p. 24.)--Ed.]


[Footnote Z: The last five lines are almost a reproduction of the
concluding five in 'Vaudracour and Julia'.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK TENTH


RESIDENCE IN FRANCE--'continued'


  It was a beautiful and silent day
  That overspread the countenance of earth,
  Then fading with unusual quietness,--
  A day as beautiful as e'er was given
  To soothe regret, though deepening what it soothed,                  5
  When by the gliding Loire I paused, and cast
  Upon his rich domains, vineyard and tilth,
  Green meadow-ground, and many-coloured woods,
  Again, and yet again, a farewell look;
  Then from the quiet of that scene passed on,                        10
  Bound to the fierce Metropolis. [A] From his throne
  The King had fallen, [B] and that invading host--
  Presumptuous cloud, on whose black front was written
  The tender mercies of the dismal wind
  That bore it--on the plains of Liberty                              15
  Had burst innocuous. Say in bolder words,
  They--who had come elate as eastern hunters
  Banded beneath the Great Mogul, when he
  Erewhile went forth from Agra or Lahore,
  Rajahs and Omrahs [C] in his train, intent                          20
  To drive their prey enclosed within a ring
  Wide as a province, but, the signal given,
  Before the point of the life-threatening spear
  Narrowing itself by moments--they, rash men,
  Had seen the anticipated quarry turned                              25
  Into avengers, from whose wrath they fled
  In terror. Disappointment and dismay
  Remained for all whose fancies had run wild
  With evil expectations; confidence
  And perfect triumph for the better cause.                           30

    The State, as if to stamp the final seal
  On her security, and to the world
  Show what she was, a high and fearless soul,
  Exulting in defiance, or heart-stung
  By sharp resentment, or belike to taunt                             35
  With spiteful gratitude the baffled League,
  That had stirred up her slackening faculties
  To a new transition, when the King was crushed,
  Spared not the empty throne, and in proud haste
  Assumed the body and venerable name                                 40
  Of a Republic. [D] Lamentable crimes,
  'Tis true, had gone before this hour, dire work
  Of massacre, [E] in which the senseless sword
  Was prayed to as a judge; but these were past,
  Earth free from them for ever, as was thought,--45
  Ephemeral monsters, to be seen but once!
  Things that could only show themselves and die.

    Cheered with this hope, to Paris I returned, [F]
  And ranged, with ardour heretofore unfelt,
  The spacious city, and in progress passed                           50
  The prison where the unhappy Monarch lay,
  Associate with his children and his wife
  In bondage; and the palace, lately stormed
  With roar of cannon by a furious host.
  I crossed the square (an empty area then!) [G]                      55
  Of the Carrousel, where so late had lain
  The dead, upon the dying heaped, and gazed
  On this and other spots, as doth a man
  Upon a volume whose contents he knows
  Are memorable, but from him locked up,                              60
  Being written in a tongue he cannot read,
  So that he questions the mute leaves with pain,
  And half upbraids their silence. But that night
  I felt most deeply in what world I was,
  What ground I trod on, and what air I breathed.                     65
  High was my room and lonely, near the roof
  Of a large mansion or hotel, a lodge
  That would have pleased me in more quiet times;
  Nor was it wholly without pleasure then.
  With unextinguished taper I kept watch,                             70
  Reading at intervals; the fear gone by
  Pressed on me almost like a fear to come.
  I thought of those September massacres,
  Divided from me by one little month,  [H]
  Saw them and touched: the rest was conjured up                      75
  From tragic fictions or true history,
  Remembrances and dim admonishments.
  The horse is taught his manage, and no star
  Of wildest course but treads back his own steps;
  For the spent hurricane the air provides                            80
  As fierce a successor; the tide retreats
  But to return out of its hiding-place
  In the great deep; all things have second-birth;
  The earthquake is not satisfied at once;
  And in this way I wrought upon myself,                              85
  Until I seemed to hear a voice that cried,
  To the whole city, "Sleep no more." The trance
  Fled with the voice to which it had given birth;
  But vainly comments of a calmer mind
  Promised soft peace and sweet forgetfulness.                        90
  The place, all hushed and silent as it was,
  Appeared unfit for the repose of night,
  Defenceless as a wood where tigers roam.

    With early morning towards the Palace-walk
  Of Orleans eagerly I turned; as yet                                 95
  The streets were still; not so those long Arcades;
  There, 'mid a peal of ill-matched sounds and cries,
  That greeted me on entering, I could hear
  Shrill voices from the hawkers in the throng,
  Bawling, "Denunciation of the Crimes                               100
  Of Maximilian Robespierre;" the hand,
  Prompt as the voice, held forth a printed speech,
  The same that had been recently pronounced,
  When Robespierre, not ignorant for what mark
  Some words of indirect reproof had been                            105
  Intended, rose in hardihood, and dared
  The man who had an ill surmise of him
  To bring his charge in openness; whereat,
  When a dead pause ensued, and no one stirred,
  In silence of all present, from his seat                           110
  Louvet walked single through the avenue,
  And took his station in the Tribune, saying,
  "I, Robespierre, accuse thee!" [I] Well is known
  The inglorious issue of that charge, and how
  He, who had launched the startling thunderbolt,                    115
  The one bold man, whose voice the attack had sounded,
  Was left without a follower to discharge
  His perilous duty, and retire lamenting
  That Heaven's best aid is wasted upon men
  Who to themselves are false. [K]
                  But these are things                               120
  Of which I speak, only as they were storm
  Or sunshine to my individual mind,
  No further. Let me then relate that now--
  In some sort seeing with my proper eyes
  That Liberty, and Life, and Death would soon                       125
  To the remotest corners of the land
  Lie in the arbitrement of those who ruled
  The capital City; what was struggled for,
  And by what combatants victory must be won;
  The indecision on their part whose aim                             130
  Seemed best, and the straightforward path of those
  Who in attack or in defence were strong
  Through their impiety--my inmost soul
  Was agitated; yea, I could almost
  Have prayed that throughout earth upon all men,                    135
  By patient exercise of reason made
  Worthy of liberty, all spirits filled
  With zeal expanding in Truth's holy light,
  The gift of tongues might fall, and power arrive
  From the four quarters of the winds to do                          140
  For France, what without help she could not do,
  A work of honour; think not that to this
  I added, work of safety: from all doubt
  Or trepidation for the end of things
  Far was I, far as angels are from guilt.                           145

    Yet did I grieve, nor only grieved, but thought
  Of opposition and of remedies:
  An insignificant stranger and obscure,
  And one, moreover, little graced with power
  Of eloquence even in my native speech,                             150
  And all unfit for tumult or intrigue,
  Yet would I at this time with willing heart
  Have undertaken for a cause so great
  Service however dangerous. I revolved,
  How much the destiny of Man had still                              155
  Hung upon single persons; that there was,
  Transcendent to all local patrimony,
  One nature, as there is one sun in heaven;
  That objects, even as they are great, thereby
  Do come within the reach of humblest eyes;                         160
  That Man is only weak through his mistrust
  And want of hope where evidence divine
  Proclaims to him that hope should be most sure;
  Nor did the inexperience of my youth
  Preclude conviction, that a spirit strong,                         165
  In hope, and trained to noble aspirations,
  A spirit thoroughly faithful to itself,
  Is for Society's unreasoning herd
  A domineering instinct, serves at once
  For way and guide, a fluent receptacle                             170
  That gathers up each petty straggling rill
  And vein of water, glad to be rolled on
  In safe obedience; that a mind, whose rest
  Is where it ought to be, in self-restraint,
  In circumspection and simplicity,                                  175
  Falls rarely in entire discomfiture
  Below its aim, or meets with, from without,
  A treachery that foils it or defeats;
  And, lastly, if the means on human will,
  Frail human will, dependent should betray                          180
  Him who too boldly trusted them, I felt
  That 'mid the loud distractions of the world
  A sovereign voice subsists within the soul,
  Arbiter undisturbed of right and wrong,
  Of life and death, in majesty severe                               185
  Enjoining, as may best promote the aims
  Of truth and justice, either sacrifice,
  From whatsoever region of our cares
  Or our infirm affections Nature pleads,
  Earnest and blind, against the stern decree.                       190

  On the other side, I called to mind those truths
  That are the common-places of the schools--
  (A theme for boys, too hackneyed for their sires,)
  Yet, with a revelation's liveliness,
  In all their comprehensive bearings known                          195
  And visible to philosophers of old,
  Men who, to business of the world untrained,
  Lived in the shade; and to Harmodius known
  And his compeer Aristogiton, [L] known
  To Brutus--that tyrannic power is weak,                            200
  Hath neither gratitude, nor faith, nor love,
  Nor the support of good or evil men
  To trust in; that the godhead which is ours
  Can never utterly be charmed or stilled;
  That nothing hath a natural right to last                          205
  But equity and reason; that all else
  Meets foes irreconcilable, and at best
  Lives only by variety of disease.

  Well might my wishes be intense, my thoughts
  Strong and perturbed, not doubting at that time                    210
  But that the virtue of one paramount mind
  Would have abashed those impious crests--have quelled
  Outrage and bloody power, and, in despite
  Of what the People long had been and were
  Through ignorance and false teaching, sadder proof                 215
  Of immaturity, and in the teeth
  Of desperate opposition from without--
  Have cleared a passage for just government,
  And left a solid birthright to the State,
  Redeemed, according to example given                               220
  By ancient lawgivers.
                  In this frame of mind,
  Dragged by a chain of harsh necessity,
  So seemed it,--now I thankfully acknowledge,
  Forced by the gracious providence of Heaven,--
  To England I returned, [M] else (though assured                    225
  That I both was and must be of small weight,
  No better than a landsman on the deck
  Of a ship struggling with a hideous storm)
  Doubtless, I should have then made common cause
  With some who perished; haply perished too, [N]                    230
  A poor mistaken and bewildered offering,--
  Should to the breast of Nature have gone back,
  With all my resolutions, all my hopes,
  A Poet only to myself, to men
  Useless, and even, beloved Friend! a soul                          235
  To thee unknown!

      Twice had the trees let fall
  Their leaves, as often Winter had put on
  His hoary crown, since I had seen the surge
  Beat against Albion's shore, [O] since ear of mine
  Had caught the accents of my native speech                         240
  Upon our native country's sacred ground.
  A patriot of the world, how could I glide
  Into communion with her sylvan shades,
  Erewhile my tuneful haunt? It pleased me more
  To abide in the great City, [P] where I found                      245
  The general air still busy with the stir
  Of that first memorable onset made
  By a strong levy of humanity
  Upon the traffickers in Negro blood; [Q]
  Effort which, though defeated, had recalled                        250
  To notice old forgotten principles,
  And through the nation spread a novel heat
  Of virtuous feeling. For myself, I own
  That this particular strife had wanted power
  To rivet my affections; nor did now                                255
  Its unsuccessful issue much excite
  My sorrow; for I brought with me the faith
  That, if France prospered, good men would not long
  Pay fruitless worship to humanity,
  And this most rotten branch of human shame,                        260
  Object, so seemed it, of superfluous pains,
  Would fall together with its parent tree.
  What, then, were my emotions, when in arms
  Britain put forth her free-born strength in league,
  Oh, pity and shame! with those confederate Powers!                 265
  Not in my single self alone I found,
  But in the minds of all ingenuous youth,
  Change and subversion from that hour. No shock
  Given to my moral nature had I known
  Down to that very moment; neither lapse                            270
  Nor turn of sentiment that might be named
  A revolution, save at this one time;
  All else was progress on the self-same path
  On which, with a diversity of pace,
  I had been travelling: this a stride at once                       275
  Into another region. As a light
  And pliant harebell, swinging in the breeze
  On some grey rock--its birth-place--so had I
  Wantoned, fast rooted on the ancient tower
  Of my beloved country, wishing not                                 280
  A happier fortune than to wither there:
  Now was I from that pleasant station torn
  And tossed about in whirlwind. I rejoiced,
  Yea, afterwards--truth most painful to record!--
  Exulted, in the triumph of my soul,                                285
  When Englishmen by thousands were o'erthrown,
  Left without glory on the field, or driven,
  Brave hearts! to shameful flight. It was a grief,--
  Grief call it not, 'twas anything but that,--
  A conflict of sensations without name,                             290
  Of which _he_ only, who may love the sight
  Of a village steeple, as I do, can judge,
  When, in the congregation bending all
  To their great Father, prayers were offered up,
  Or praises for our country's victories;                            295
  And, 'mid the simple worshippers, perchance
  I only, like an uninvited guest
  Whom no one owned, sate silent; shall I add,
  Fed on the day of vengeance yet to come.

  Oh! much have they to account for, who could tear,                 300
  By violence, at one decisive rent,
  From the best youth in England their dear pride,
  Their joy, in England; this, too, at a time
  In which worst losses easily might wean
  The best of names, when patriotic love                             305
  Did of itself in modesty give way,
  Like the Precursor when the Deity
  Is come Whose harbinger he was; a time
  In which apostasy from ancient faith
  Seemed but conversion to a higher creed;                           310
  Withal a season dangerous and wild,
  A time when sage Experience would have snatched
  Flowers out of any hedge-row to compose
  A chaplet in contempt of his grey locks.

  When the proud fleet that bears the red-cross flag [R]             315
  In that unworthy service was prepared
  To mingle, I beheld the vessels lie,
  A brood of gallant creatures, on the deep;
  I saw them in their rest, a sojourner
  Through a whole month of calm and glassy days                      320
  In that delightful island which protects
  Their place of convocation [S]--there I heard,
  Each evening, pacing by the still sea-shore,
  A monitory sound that never failed,--
  The sunset cannon. While the orb went down                         325
  In the tranquillity of nature, came
  That voice, ill requiem! seldom heard by me
  Without a spirit overcast by dark
  Imaginations, sense of woes to come,
  Sorrow for human kind, and pain of heart.                          330

    In France, the men, who, for their desperate ends,
  Had plucked up mercy by the roots, were glad
  Of this new enemy. Tyrants, strong before
  In wicked pleas, were strong as demons now;
  And thus, on every side beset with foes,                           335
  The goaded land waxed mad; the crimes of few
  Spread into madness of the many; blasts
  From hell came sanctified like airs from heaven.
  The sternness of the just, the faith of those
  Who doubted not that Providence had times                          340
  Of vengeful retribution, theirs who throned
  The human Understanding paramount
  And made of that their God, [T] the hopes of men
  Who were content to barter short-lived pangs
  For a paradise of ages, the blind rage                             345
  Of insolent tempers, the light vanity
  Of intermeddlers, steady purposes
  Of the suspicious, slips of the indiscreet,
  And all the accidents of life were pressed
  Into one service, busy with one work.                              350
  The Senate stood aghast, her prudence quenched,
  Her wisdom stifled, and her justice scared,
  Her frenzy only active to extol
  Past outrages, and shape the way for new,
  Which no one dared to oppose or mitigate.                          355

    Domestic carnage now filled the whole year
  With feast-days; old men from the chimney-nook,
  The maiden from the bosom of her love,
  The mother from the cradle of her babe,
  The warrior from the field--all perished, all--360
  Friends, enemies, of all parties, ages, ranks,
  Head after head, and never heads enough
  For those that bade them fall. They found their joy,
  They made it proudly, eager as a child,
  (If like desires of innocent little ones                           365
  May with such heinous appetites be compared,)
  Pleased in some open field to exercise
  A toy that mimics with revolving wings
  The motion of a wind-mill; though the air
  Do of itself blow fresh, and make the vanes                        370
  Spin in his eyesight, _that_ contents him not,
  But, with the plaything at arm's length, he sets
  His front against the blast, and runs amain,
  That it may whirl the faster.
                                 Amid the depth
  Of those enormities, even thinking minds                           375
  Forgot, at seasons, whence they had their being;
  Forgot that such a sound was ever heard
  As Liberty upon earth: yet all beneath
  Her innocent authority was wrought,
  Nor could have been, without her blessed name.                     380
  The illustrious wife of Roland, in the hour
  Of her composure, felt that agony,
  And gave it vent in her last words. [U] O Friend!
  It was a lamentable time for man,
  Whether a hope had e'er been his or not;                           385
  A woful time for them whose hopes survived
  The shock; most woful for those few who still
  Were flattered, and had trust in human kind:
  They had the deepest feeling of the grief.
  Meanwhile the Invaders fared as they deserved:                     390
  The Herculean Commonwealth had put forth her arms,
  And throttled with an infant godhead's might
  The snakes about her cradle; that was well,
  And as it should be; yet no cure for them
  Whose souls were sick with pain of what would be                   395
  Hereafter brought in charge against mankind.
  Most melancholy at that time, O Friend!
  Were my day-thoughts,--my nights were miserable;
  Through months, through years, long after the last beat
  Of those atrocities, the hour of sleep                             400
  To me came rarely charged with natural gifts,
  Such ghastly visions had I of despair
  And tyranny, and implements of death;
  And innocent victims sinking under fear,
  And momentary hope, and worn-out prayer,                           405
  Each in his separate cell, or penned in crowds
  For sacrifice, and struggling with fond mirth
  And levity in dungeons, where the dust
  Was laid with tears. Then suddenly the scene
  Changed, and the unbroken dream entangled me                       410
  In long orations, which I strove to plead
  Before unjust tribunals,--with a voice
  Labouring, a brain confounded, and a sense,
  Death-like, of treacherous desertion, felt
  In the last place of refuge--my own soul.                          415

    When I began in youth's delightful prime
  To yield myself to Nature, when that strong
  And holy passion overcame me first,
  Nor day nor night, evening or morn, was free
  From its oppression. But, O Power Supreme!                         420
  Without Whose call this world would cease to breathe,
  Who from the fountain of Thy grace dost fill
  The veins that branch through every frame of life,
  Making man what he is, creature divine,
  In single or in social eminence,                                   425
  Above the rest raised infinite ascents
  When reason that enables him to be
  Is not sequestered--what a change is here!
  How different ritual for this after-worship,
  What countenance to promote this second love!                      430
  The first was service paid to things which lie
  Guarded within the bosom of Thy will.
  Therefore to serve was high beatitude;
  Tumult was therefore gladness, and the fear
  Ennobling, venerable; sleep secure,                                435
  And waking thoughts more rich than happiest dreams.

    But as the ancient Prophets, borne aloft
  In vision, yet constrained by natural laws
  With them to take a troubled human heart,
  Wanted not consolations, nor a creed                               440
  Of reconcilement, then when they denounced,
  On towns and cities, wallowing in the abyss
  Of their offences, punishment to come;
  Or saw, like other men, with bodily eyes,
  Before them, in some desolated place,                              445
  The wrath consummate and the threat fulfilled;
  So, with devout humility be it said,
  So, did a portion of that spirit fall
  On me uplifted from the vantage-ground
  Of pity and sorrow to a state of being                             450
  That through the time's exceeding fierceness saw
  Glimpses of retribution, terrible,
  And in the order of sublime behests:
  But, even if that were not, amid the awe
  Of unintelligible chastisement,                                    455
  Not only acquiescences of faith
  Survived, but daring sympathies with power,
  Motions not treacherous or profane, else why
  Within the folds of no ungentle breast
  Their dread vibration to this hour prolonged?                      460
  Wild blasts of music thus could find their way
  Into the midst of turbulent events;
  So that worst tempests might be listened to.
  Then was the truth received into my heart,
  That, under heaviest sorrow earth can bring,                       465
  If from the affliction somewhere do not grow
  Honour which could not else have been, a faith,
  An elevation and a sanctity,
  If new strength be not given nor old restored,
  The blame is ours, not Nature's. When a taunt                      470
  Was taken up by scoffers in their pride,
  Saying, "Behold the harvest that we reap
  From popular government and equality,"
  I clearly saw that neither these nor aught
  Of wild belief engrafted on their names                            475
  By false philosophy had caused the woe,
  But a terrific reservoir of guilt
  And ignorance rilled up from age to age,
  That could no longer hold its loathsome charge,
  But burst and spread in deluge through the land.                   480

    And as the desert hath green spots, the sea
  Small islands scattered amid stormy waves,
  So that disastrous period did not want
  Bright sprinklings of all human excellence,
  To which the silver wands of saints in Heaven                      485
  Might point with rapturous joy. Yet not the less,
  For those examples in no age surpassed
  Of fortitude and energy and love,
  And human nature faithful to herself
  Under worst trials, was I driven to think                          490
  Of the glad times when first I traversed France
  A youthful pilgrim; [V] above all reviewed
  That eventide, when under windows bright
  With happy faces and with garlands hung,
  And through a rainbow-arch that spanned the street,                495
  Triumphal pomp for liberty confirmed, [W]
  I paced, a dear companion at my side,
  The town of Arras, [X] whence with promise high
  Issued, on delegation to sustain
  Humanity and right, _that_ Robespierre,                            500
  He who thereafter, and in how short time!
  Wielded the sceptre of the Atheist crew.
  When the calamity spread far and wide--
  And this same city, that did then appear
  To outrun the rest in exultation, groaned                          505
  Under the vengeance of her cruel son,
  As Lear reproached the winds--I could almost
  Have quarrelled with that blameless spectacle
  For lingering yet an image in my mind
  To mock me under such a strange reverse.                           510

    O Friend! few happier moments have been mine
  Than that which told the downfall of this Tribe
  So dreaded, so abhorred. [Y] The day deserves
  A separate record. Over the smooth sands
  Of Leven's ample estuary lay                                       515
  My journey, and beneath a genial sun,
  With distant prospect among gleams of sky
  And clouds, and intermingling mountain tops,
  In one inseparable glory clad,
  Creatures of one ethereal substance met                            520
  In consistory, like a diadem
  Or crown of burning seraphs as they sit
  In the empyrean. Underneath that pomp
  Celestial, lay unseen the pastoral vales
  Among whose happy fields I had grown up                            525
  From childhood. On the fulgent spectacle,
  That neither passed away nor changed, I gazed
  Enrapt; but brightest things are wont to draw
  Sad opposites out of the inner heart,
  As even their pensive influence drew from mine.                    530
  How could it otherwise? for not in vain
  That very morning had I turned aside
  To seek the ground where, 'mid a throng of graves,
  An honoured teacher of my youth was laid, [Z]
  And on the stone were graven by his desire                         535
  Lines from the churchyard elegy of Gray. [a]
  This faithful guide, speaking from his death-bed,
  Added no farewell to his parting counsel,
  But said to me, "My head will soon lie low;"
  And when I saw the turf that covered him,                          540
  After the lapse of full eight years, [b] those words,
  With sound of voice and countenance of the Man,
  Came back upon me, so that some few tears
  Fell from me in my own despite. But now
  I thought, still traversing that widespread plain,                 545
  With tender pleasure of the verses graven
  Upon his tombstone, whispering to myself:
  He loved the Poets, and, if now alive,
  Would have loved me, as one not destitute
  Of promise, nor belying the kind hope                              550
  That he had formed, when I, at his command,
  Began to spin, with toil, my earliest songs. [c]

  As I advanced, all that I saw or felt
  Was gentleness and peace. Upon a small
  And rocky island near, a fragment stood                            555
  (Itself like a sea rock) the low remains
  (With shells encrusted, dark with briny weeds)
  Of a dilapidated structure, once
  A Romish chapel, [d] where the vested priest
  Said matins at the hour that suited those                          560
  Who crossed the sands with ebb of morning tide.
  Not far from that still ruin all the plain
  Lay spotted with a variegated crowd
  Of vehicles and travellers, horse and foot,
  Wading beneath the conduct of their guide                          565
  In loose procession through the shallow stream
  Of inland waters; the great sea meanwhile
  Heaved at safe distance, far retired. I paused,
  Longing for skill to paint a scene so bright
  And cheerful, but the foremost of the band                         570
  As he approached, no salutation given
  In the familiar language of the day,
  Cried, "Robespierre is dead!"--nor was a doubt,
  After strict question, left within my mind
  That he and his supporters all were fallen.                        575

    Great was my transport, deep my gratitude
  To everlasting Justice, by this fiat
  Made manifest. "Come now, ye golden times,"
  Said I forth-pouring on those open sands
  A hymn of triumph: "as the morning comes                           580
  From out the bosom of the night, come ye:
  Thus far our trust is verified; behold!
  They who with clumsy desperation brought
  A river of Blood, and preached that nothing else
  Could cleanse the Augean stable, by the might                      585
  Of their own helper have been swept away;
  Their madness stands declared and visible;
  Elsewhere will safety now be sought, and earth
  March firmly towards righteousness and peace."--
  Then schemes I framed more calmly, when and how                    590
  The madding factions might be tranquillised,
  And how through hardships manifold and long
  The glorious renovation would proceed.
  Thus interrupted by uneasy bursts
  Of exultation, I pursued my way                                    595
  Along that very shore which I had skimmed
  In former days, when--spurring from the Vale
  Of Nightshade, and St. Mary's mouldering fane, [e]
  And the stone abbot, after circuit made
  In wantonness of heart, a joyous band                              600
  Of school-boys hastening to their distant home
  Along the margin of the moonlight sea--
  We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand. [f]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: He left Blois for Paris in the late autumn of 1792--Ed.]


[Footnote B: King Louis the Sixteenth, dethroned on August 10th,
1792.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: "The Ormrahs or lords of the Moghul's court." See Francois
Besnier's letter 'Concerning Hindusthan'.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: The "Republic" was decreed on the 22nd of September
1792.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: The "September Massacres" lasted from the 2nd to the 6th of
that month.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: He reached Paris in the beginning of October 1792.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: The Place du Carrousel.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: See notes [E] and [F].--Ed.]


[Footnote I:

  "One day, among the last of October, Robespierre, being summoned to
  the tribune by some new hint of that old calumny of the Dictatorship,
  was speaking and pleading there, with more and more comfort to
  himself; till rising high in heart, he cried out valiantly: Is there
  any man here that dare specifically accuse me? ''Moi!'' exclaimed one.
  Pause of deep silence: a lean angry little Figure, with broad bald
  brow, strode swiftly towards the tribune, taking papers from its
  pocket: 'I accuse thee, Robespierre,--I, Jean Baptiste Louvet!' The
  Seagreen became tallow-green; shrinking to a corner of the tribune,
  Danton cried, 'Speak, Robespierre; there are many good citizens that
  listen;' but the tongue refused its office. And so Louvet, with a
  shrill tone, read and recited crime after crime: dictatorial temper,
  exclusive popularity, bullying at elections, mob-retinue, September
  Massacres;--till all the Convention shrieked again," etc. etc.

Carlyle's 'French Revolution', vol. iii. book ii. chap. 5.--Ed.]


[Footnote K: Robespierre got a week's delay to prepare a defence.

  "That week he is not idle. He is ready at the day with his written
  Speech: smooth as a Jesuit Doctor's, and convinces some. And
  now?...poor Louvet, unprepared, can do little or nothing. Barrere
  proposes that these comparatively despicable _personalities_ be
  dismissed by order of the day! Order of the day it accordingly is."

Carlyle, _ut supra_.--Ed.]


[Footnote L: Harmodius and Aristogiton of Athens murdered the tyrant
Hipparchus, 514 B.C., and delivered the city from the rule of the
Pisistratidae, much as Brutus rose against Caesar.--Ed.]


[Footnote M: He crossed the Channel, and returned to England
reluctantly, in December 1792. Compare p. 376, l. 349:

  'Since I withdrew unwillingly from France.'

Ed.]


[Footnote N: Had he remained longer in Paris, he would probably have
fallen a victim, amongst the Brissotins, to the reactionary fury of the
Jacobin party.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: He left England in November 1791, and returned in December
1792.--Ed.]


[Footnote P: He stayed in London during the winter of 1792-3 and spring
of 1793, probably with his elder brother Richard (who was a solicitor
there), writing his remarkable letter on the French Revolution to the
Bishop of Landaff, and doubtless making arrangements for the publication
of the 'Evening Walk'. The 'Descriptive Sketches' were not written till
the summer of 1793 (compare the thirteenth book of 'The Prelude', p.
366); but in a letter dated "Forncett, February 16th, 1793," his sister
sends to a friend an interesting criticism of her brother's verses. The
'Evening Walk' must therefore have appeared in January 1793.--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: The movement for the abolition of slavery, led by Clarkson
and Wilberforce. Compare the sonnet 'To Thomas Clarkson, on the final
passing of the Bill for the Abolition of the Slave Trade, March' 1807,
in vol. iv.--Ed.]


[Footnote R: The red-cross flag, i. e. the British ensign.

  "On the union of the crowns of England and Scotland, James I. issued a
  proclamation that _all subjects of this isle and the kingdom of Great
  Britain should bear in the main-top the red cross commonly called St.
  George's Cross, and the white cross commonly called St. Andrew's
  Cross, joined together according to the form made by our own heralds._
  This was the first Union Jack."

'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (ninth edition), article "Flag."--Ed.]


[Footnote S: In the Isle of Wight. Wordsworth spent a month of the
summer of 1793 there, with William Calvert. (See the Advertisement to
'Guilt and Sorrow', vol. i. p. 77.)--Ed.]


[Footnote T: The goddess of Reason, enthroned in Paris, November 10th,
1793.--Ed.]


[Footnote U: Jeanne-Marie Phlipon--Madame Roland--was guillotined on the
8th of November 1793.

  "Arrived at the foot of the scaffold, she asked for pen and paper _to
  write the strange thoughts that were rising in her_: a remarkable
  request; which was refused. Looking at the Statue of Liberty which
  stands there, she says bitterly: _O Liberty, what things are done in
  thy name!_ ... Like a white Grecian Statue, serenely complete," adds
  Carlyle, "she shines in that black wreck of things,--long memorable."

'French Revolution', vol. iii. book v. chap. 2.

 Madame Roland's apostrophe was

  'O Liberte, que de crimes l'on commet en ton nom!'

 Ed.]


[Footnote V: In the long vacation of 1790, with his friend Jones.--Ed.]


[Footnote W: Compare the sonnet, vol. ii. p. 332, beginning:

  'Jones! as from Calais southward you and I
  Went pacing side by side, this public Way
  Streamed with the pomp of a too-credulous day,
  When faith was pledged to new-born Liberty.'

Ed.]


[Footnote X: Robespierre was a native of Arras.--Ed.]


[Footnote Y: Robespierre was guillotined with his confederates on the
28th July 1794. Wordsworth lived in Cumberland--at Keswick, Whitehaven,
and Penrith--from the winter of 1793-4 till the spring of 1795. He must
have made this journey across the Ulverston Sands, in the first week of
August 1794. Compare Wordsworth's remarks on Robespierre, in his 'Letter
to a Friend of Burns',--Ed.]


[Footnote Z: The "honoured teacher" of his youth was the Rev. William
Taylor, of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, who was master at Hawkshead
School from 1782 to 1786, who died while Wordsworth was at school, and
who was buried in Cartmell Churchyard. See the note to the 'Address to
the Scholars of the Village School of----' (vol. ii. p. 85).--Ed.]


[Footnote a: The following is the inscription on the head-stone in
Cartmell Churchyard:

  'In memory of the Rev. William Taylor, A. M., son of John Taylor of
  Outerthwaite, who was some years a Fellow of Eman. Coll., Camb., and
  Master of the Free School at Hawkshead. He departed this life June the
  12th 1786, aged 32 years 2 months and 13 days.

    His Merits, stranger, seek not to disclose,
    Or draw his Frailties from their dread abode,
    There they alike in trembling Hope repose,
    The Bosom of his Father and his God.'

Ed.]


[Footnote b: This is exact. Taylor died in 1786. Robespierre was
executed in 1794, eight years afterwards.--Ed.]


[Footnote c: He refers to the 'Lines written as a School Exercise at
Hawkskead, anno aetatis' 14; and, probably, to 'The Summer Vacation',
which is mentioned in the "Autobiographical Memoranda" as "a task
imposed by my master," but whether by Taylor, or by his predecessors at
Hawkshead School in Wordsworth's time--Parker and Christian--is
uncertain.--Ed.]


[Footnote d: Compare Hausman's 'Guide to the Lakes' (1803), p. 209.

  "Chapel Island on the right is a desolate object, where there are yet
  some remains of an oratory built by the monks of Furness, in which
  Divine Service was daily performed at a certain hour for passengers
  who crossed the sands with the morning tide."

This, evidently, is the ruin referred to by Wordsworth.--Ed.]


[Footnote e: See note, book ii. ll. 103-6.--Ed.]


[Footnote f: By Arrad Foot and Greenodd, beyond Ulverston, on the way to
Hawkshead.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK ELEVENTH.


FRANCE--concluded.


  From that time forth, [A] Authority in France
  Put on a milder face; Terror had ceased,
  Yet every thing was wanting that might give
  Courage to them who looked for good by light
  Of rational Experience, for the shoots                               5
  And hopeful blossoms of a second spring:
  Yet, in me, confidence was unimpaired;
  The Senate's language, and the public acts
  And measures of the Government, though both
  Weak, and of heartless omen, had not power                          10
  To daunt me; in the People was my trust,
  And, in the virtues which mine eyes had seen. [1]
  I knew that wound external could not take
  Life from the young Republic; that new foes
  Would only follow, in the path of shame,                            15
  Their brethren, and her triumphs be in the end
  Great, universal, irresistible.
  This intuition led me to confound
  One victory with another, higher far,--
  Triumphs of unambitious peace at home,                              20
  And noiseless fortitude. Beholding still
  Resistance strong as heretofore, I thought
  That what was in degree the same was likewise
  The same in quality,--that, as the worse
  Of the two spirits then at strife remained                          25
  Untired, the better, surely, would preserve
  The heart that first had roused him. Youth maintains,
  In all conditions of society,
  Communion more direct and intimate
  With Nature,--hence, ofttimes, with reason too--30
  Than age or manhood, even. To Nature, then,
  Power had reverted: habit, custom, law,
  Had left an interregnum's open space
  For _her_ to move about in, uncontrolled.
  Hence could I see how Babel-like their task,                        35
  Who, by the recent deluge stupified,
  With their whole souls went culling from the day
  Its petty promises, to build a tower
  For their own safety; laughed with my compeers
  At gravest heads, by enmity to France                               40
  Distempered, till they found, in every blast
  Forced from the street-disturbing newsman's horn,
  For her great cause record or prophecy
  Of utter ruin. How might we believe
  That wisdom could, in any shape, come near                          45
  Men clinging to delusions so insane?
  And thus, experience proving that no few
  Of our opinions had been just, we took
  Like credit to ourselves where less was due,
  And thought that other notions were as sound,                       50
  Yea, could not but be right, because we saw
  That foolish men opposed them.
                                   To a strain
  More animated I might here give way,
  And tell, since juvenile errors are my theme,
  What in those days, through Britain, was performed                  55
  To turn _all_ judgments out of their right course;
  But this is passion over-near ourselves,
  Reality too close and too intense,
  And intermixed with something, in my mind,
  Of scorn and condemnation personal,                                 60
  That would profane the sanctity of verse.
  Our Shepherds, this say merely, at that time
  Acted, or seemed at least to act, like men
  Thirsting to make the guardian crook of law
  A tool of murder; [B] they who ruled the State,                     65
  Though with such awful proof before their eyes
  That he, who would sow death, reaps death, or worse,
  And can reap nothing better, child-like longed
  To imitate, not wise enough to avoid;
  Or left (by mere timidity betrayed)                                 70
  The plain straight road, for one no better chosen
  Than if their wish had been to undermine
  Justice, and make an end of Liberty. [B]

    But from these bitter truths I must return
  To my own history. It hath been told                                75
  That I was led to take an eager part
  In arguments of civil polity,
  Abruptly, and indeed before my time:
  I had approached, like other youths, the shield
  Of human nature from the golden side,                               80
  And would have fought, even to the death, to attest
  The quality of the metal which I saw.
  What there is best in individual man,
  Of wise in passion, and sublime in power,
  Benevolent in small societies,                                      85
  And great in large ones, I had oft revolved,
  Felt deeply, but not thoroughly understood
  By reason: nay, far from it; they were yet,
  As cause was given me afterwards to learn,
  Not proof against the injuries of the day;                          90
  Lodged only at the sanctuary's door,
  Not safe within its bosom. Thus prepared,
  And with such general insight into evil,
  And of the bounds which sever it from good,
  As books and common intercourse with life                           95
  Must needs have given--to the inexperienced mind,
  When the world travels in a beaten road,
  Guide faithful as is needed--I began
  To meditate with ardour on the rule
  And management of nations; what it is                              100
  And ought to be; and strove to learn how far
  Their power or weakness, wealth or poverty,
  Their happiness or misery, depends
  Upon their laws, and fashion of the State.

    O pleasant exercise of hope and joy! [C]                         105
  For mighty were the auxiliars which then stood
  Upon our side, us who were strong in love!
  Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive,
  But to be young was very Heaven! [D] O times,
  In which the meagre, stale, forbidding ways                        110
  Of custom, law, and statute, took at once
  The attraction of a country in romance!
  When Reason seemed the most to assert her rights
  When most intent on making of herself
  A prime enchantress--to assist the work,                           115
  Which then was going forward in her name!
  Not favoured spots alone, but the whole Earth,
  The beauty wore of promise--that which sets
  (As at some moments might not be unfelt
  Among the bowers of Paradise itself)                               120
  The budding rose above the rose full blown.
  What temper at the prospect did not wake
  To happiness unthought of? The inert
  Were roused, and lively natures rapt away!
  They who had fed their childhood upon dreams,                      125
  The play-fellows of fancy, who had made
  All powers of swiftness, subtilty, and strength
  Their ministers,--who in lordly wise had stirred
  Among the grandest objects of the sense,
  And dealt with whatsoever they found there                         130
  As if they had within some lurking right
  To wield it;--they, too, who of gentle mood
  Had watched all gentle motions, and to these
  Had fitted their own thoughts, schemers more mild,
  And in the region of their peaceful selves;--135
  Now was it that _both_ found, the meek and lofty
  Did both find helpers to their hearts' desire,
  And stuff at hand, plastic as they could wish,--
  Were called upon to exercise their skill,
  Not in Utopia,--subterranean fields,--140
  Or some secreted island, Heaven knows where!
  But in the very world, which is the world
  Of all of us,--the place where, in the end,
  We find our happiness, or not at all!

    Why should I not confess that Earth was then                     145
  To me, what an inheritance, new-fallen,
  Seems, when the first time visited, to one
  Who thither comes to find in it his home?
  He walks about and looks upon the spot
  With cordial transport, moulds it and remoulds,                    150
  And is half pleased with things that are amiss,
  'Twill be such joy to see them disappear.

    An active partisan, I thus convoked
  From every object pleasant circumstance
  To suit my ends; I moved among mankind                             155
  With genial feelings still predominant;
  When erring, erring on the better part,
  And in the kinder spirit; placable,
  Indulgent, as not uninformed that men
  See as they have been taught--Antiquity                            160
  Gives rights to error; and aware, no less,
  That throwing off oppression must be work
  As well of License as of Liberty;
  And above all--for this was more than all--
  Not caring if the wind did now and then                            165
  Blow keen upon an eminence that gave
  Prospect so large into futurity;
  In brief, a child of Nature, as at first,
  Diffusing only those affections wider
  That from the cradle had grown up with me,                         170
  And losing, in no other way than light
  Is lost in light, the weak in the more strong.

    In the main outline, such it might be said
  Was my condition, till with open war
  Britain opposed the liberties of France. [E]                       175
  This threw me first out of the pale of love;
  Soured and corrupted, upwards to the source,
  My sentiments; was not, as hitherto,
  A swallowing up of lesser things in great,
  But change of them into their contraries;                          180
  And thus a way was opened for mistakes
  And false conclusions, in degree as gross,
  In kind more dangerous. What had been a pride,
  Was now a shame; my likings and my loves
  Ran in new channels, leaving old ones dry;                         185
  And hence a blow that, in maturer age,
  Would but have touched the judgment, struck more deep
  Into sensations near the heart: meantime,
  As from the first, wild theories were afloat,
  To whose pretensions, sedulously urged,                            190
  I had but lent a careless ear, assured
  That time was ready to set all things right,
  And that the multitude, so long oppressed,
  Would be oppressed no more.

                              But when events
  Brought less encouragement, and unto these                         195
  The immediate proof of principles no more
  Could be entrusted, while the events themselves,
  Worn out in greatness, stripped of novelty,
  Less occupied the mind, and sentiments
  Could through my understanding's natural growth                    200
  No longer keep their ground, by faith maintained
  Of inward consciousness, and hope that laid
  Her hand upon her object--evidence
  Safer, of universal application, such
  As could not be impeached, was sought elsewhere.                   205

  But now, become oppressors in their turn,
  Frenchmen had changed a war of self-defence
  For one of conquest, [F] losing sight of all
  Which they had struggled for: now mounted up,
  Openly in the eye of earth and heaven,                             210
  The scale of liberty. I read her doom,
  With anger vexed, with disappointment sore,
  But not dismayed, nor taking to the shame
  Of a false prophet. While resentment rose
  Striving to hide, what nought could heal, the wounds               215
  Of mortified presumption, I adhered
  More firmly to old tenets, and, to prove
  Their temper, strained them more; and thus, in heat
  Of contest, did opinions every day
  Grow into consequence, till round my mind                          220
  They clung, as if they were its life, nay more,
  The very being of the immortal soul.

    This was the time, when, all things tending fast
  To depravation, speculative schemes--
  That promised to abstract the hopes of Man                         225
  Out of his feelings, to be fixed thenceforth
  For ever in a purer element--
  Found ready welcome. Tempting region _that_
  For Zeal to enter and refresh herself,
  Where passions had the privilege to work,                          230
  And never hear the sound of their own names.
  But, speaking more in charity, the dream
  Flattered the young, pleased with extremes, nor least
  With that which makes our Reason's naked self
  The object of its fervour. What delight!                           235
  How glorious! in self-knowledge and self-rule,
  To look through all the frailties of the world,
  And, with a resolute mastery shaking off
  Infirmities of nature, time, and place,
  Build social upon personal Liberty,                                240
  Which, to the blind restraints of general laws
  Superior, magisterially adopts
  One guide, the light of circumstances, flashed
  Upon an independent intellect.
  Thus expectation rose again; thus hope,                            245
  From her first ground expelled, grew proud once more.
  Oft, as my thoughts were turned to human kind,
  I scorned indifference; but, inflamed with thirst
  Of a secure intelligence, and sick
  Of other longing, I pursued what seemed                            250
  A more exalted nature; wished that Man
  Should start out of his earthy, worm-like state,
  And spread abroad the wings of Liberty,
  Lord of himself, in undisturbed delight--
  A noble aspiration! _yet_ I feel                                   255
  (Sustained by worthier as by wiser thoughts)
  The aspiration, nor shall ever cease
  To feel it;--but return we to our course.

    Enough, 'tis true--could such a plea excuse
  Those aberrations--had the clamorous friends                       260
  Of ancient Institutions said and done
  To bring disgrace upon their very names;
  Disgrace, of which, custom and written law,
  And sundry moral sentiments as props
  Or emanations of those institutes,                                 265
  Too justly bore a part. A veil had been
  Uplifted; why deceive ourselves? in sooth,
  'Twas even so; and sorrow for the man
  Who either had not eyes wherewith to see,
  Or, seeing, had forgotten! A strong shock                          270
  Was given to old opinions; all men's minds
  Had felt its power, and mine was both let loose,
  Let loose and goaded. After what hath been
  Already said of patriotic love,
  Suffice it here to add, that, somewhat stern                       275
  In temperament, withal a happy man,
  And therefore bold to look on painful things,
  Free likewise of the world, and thence more bold,
  I summoned my best skill, and toiled, intent
  To anatomise the frame of social life,                             280
  Yea, the whole body of society
  Searched to its heart. Share with me, Friend! the wish
  That some dramatic tale, endued with shapes
  Livelier, and flinging out less guarded words
  Than suit the work we fashion, might set forth                     285
  What then I learned, or think I learned, of truth,
  And the errors into which I fell, betrayed
  By present objects, and by reasonings false
  From their beginnings, inasmuch as drawn
  Out of a heart that had been turned aside                          290
  From Nature's way by outward accidents,
  And which was thus confounded, more and more
  Misguided, and misguiding. So I fared,
  Dragging all precepts, judgments, maxims, creeds,
  Like culprits to the bar; calling the mind,                        295
  Suspiciously, to establish in plain day
  Her titles and her honours; now believing,
  Now disbelieving; endlessly perplexed
  With impulse, motive, right and wrong, the ground
  Of obligation, what the rule and whence                            300
  The sanction; till, demanding formal _proof_,
  And seeking it in every thing, I lost
  All feeling of conviction, and, in fine,
  Sick, wearied out with contrarieties,
  Yielded up moral questions in despair.                             305

  This was the crisis of that strong disease,
  This the soul's last and lowest ebb; I drooped,
  Deeming our blessed reason of least use
  Where wanted most: "The lordly attributes
  Of will and choice," I bitterly exclaimed,                         310
  "What are they but a mockery of a Being
  Who hath in no concerns of his a test
  Of good and evil; knows not what to fear
  Or hope for, what to covet or to shun;
  And who, if those could be discerned, would yet                    315
  Be little profited, would see, and ask
  Where is the obligation to enforce?
  And, to acknowledged law rebellious, still,
  As selfish passion urged, would act amiss;
  The dupe of folly, or the slave of crime."                         320

    Depressed, bewildered thus, I did not walk
  With scoffers, seeking light and gay revenge
  From indiscriminate laughter, nor sate down
  In reconcilement with an utter waste
  Of intellect; such sloth I could not brook,                        325
  (Too well I loved, in that my spring of life,
  Pains-taking thoughts, and truth, their dear reward)
  But turned to abstract science, and there sought
  Work for the reasoning faculty enthroned
  Where the disturbances of space and time--330
  Whether in matters various, properties
  Inherent, or from human will and power
  Derived--find no admission. [G] Then it was--
  Thanks to the bounteous Giver of all good!--
  That the beloved Sister in whose sight                             335
  Those days were passed, [H] now speaking in a voice
  Of sudden admonition--like a brook [I]
  That did but _cross_ a lonely road, and now
  Is seen, heard, felt, and caught at every turn,
  Companion never lost through many a league--340
  Maintained for me a saving intercourse
  With my true self; for, though bedimmed and changed
  Much, as it seemed, I was no further changed
  Than as a clouded and a waning moon:
  She whispered still that brightness would return,                  345
  She, in the midst of all, preserved me still
  A Poet, made me seek beneath that name,
  And that alone, my office upon earth;
  And, lastly, as hereafter will be shown,
  If willing audience fail not, Nature's self,                       350
  By all varieties of human love
  Assisted, led me back through opening day
  To those sweet counsels between head and heart
  Whence grew that genuine knowledge, fraught with peace,
  Which, through the later sinkings of this cause,                   355
  Hath still upheld me, and upholds me now
  In the catastrophe (for so they dream,
  And nothing less), when, finally to close
  And seal up all the gains of France, a Pope
  Is summoned in, to crown an Emperor--[K]                           360
  This last opprobrium, when we see a people,
  That once looked up in faith, as if to Heaven
  For manna, take a lesson from the dog
  Returning to his vomit; when the sun
  That rose in splendour, was alive, and moved                       365
  In exultation with a living pomp
  Of clouds--his glory's natural retinue--
  Hath dropped all functions by the gods bestowed,
  And, turned into a gewgaw, a machine,
  Sets like an Opera phantom.
                              Thus, O Friend!                        370
  Through times of honour and through times of shame
  Descending, have I faithfully retraced
  The perturbations of a youthful mind
  Under a long-lived storm of great events--
  A story destined for thy ear, who now,                             375
  Among the fallen of nations, dost abide
  Where Etna, over hill and valley, casts
  His shadow stretching towards Syracuse, [L]
  The city of Timoleon! [M] Righteous Heaven!
  How are the mighty prostrated! They first,                         380
  They first of all that breathe should have awaked
  When the great voice was heard from out the tombs
  Of ancient heroes. If I suffered grief
  For ill-requited France, by many deemed
  A trifler only in her proudest day;                                385
  Have been distressed to think of what she once
  Promised, now is; a far more sober cause
  Thine eyes must see of sorrow in a land.
  To the reanimating influence lost
  Of memory, to virtue lost and hope,                                390
  Though with the wreck of loftier years bestrewn.

    But indignation works where hope is not,
  And thou, O Friend! wilt be refreshed. There is
  One great society alone on earth:
  The noble Living and the noble Dead.                               395

    Thine be such converse strong and sanative,
  A ladder for thy spirit to reascend
  To health and joy and pure contentedness;
  To me the grief confined, that thou art gone
  From this last spot of earth, where Freedom now                    400
  Stands single in her only sanctuary;
  A lonely wanderer art gone, by pain
  Compelled and sickness, [N] at this latter day,
  This sorrowful reverse for all mankind.
  I feel for thee, must utter what I feel:                           405
  The sympathies erewhile in part discharged,
  Gather afresh, and will have vent again:
  My own delights do scarcely seem to me
  My own delights; the lordly Alps themselves,
  Those rosy peaks, from which the Morning looks                     410
  Abroad on many nations, are no more
  For me that image of pure gladsomeness
  Which they were wont to be. Through kindred scenes,
  For purpose, at a time, how different!
  Thou tak'st thy way, carrying the heart and soul                   415
  That Nature gives to Poets, now by thought
  Matured, and in the summer of their strength.
  Oh! wrap him in your shades, ye giant woods,
  On Etna's side; and thou, O flowery field
  Of Enna! [O] is there not some nook of thine,                      420
  From the first play-time of the infant world
  Kept sacred to restorative delight,
  When from afar invoked by anxious love?

    Child of the mountains, among shepherds reared,
  Ere yet familiar with the classic page,                            425
  I learnt to dream of Sicily; and lo,
  The gloom, that, but a moment past, was deepened
  At thy command, at her command gives way;
  A pleasant promise, wafted from her shores,
  Comes o'er my heart: in fancy I behold                             430
  Her seas yet smiling, her once happy vales;
  Nor can my tongue give utterance to a name
  Of note belonging to that honoured isle,
  Philosopher or Bard, Empedocles, [P]
  Or Archimedes, [Q] pure abstracted soul!                           435
  That doth not yield a solace to my grief:
  And, O Theocritus, [R] so far have some
  Prevailed among the powers of heaven and earth,
  By their endowments, good or great, that they
  Have had, as thou reportest, miracles                              440
  Wrought for them in old time: yea, not unmoved,
  When thinking on my own beloved friend,
  I hear thee tell how bees with honey fed
  Divine Comates, [S] by his impious lord
  Within a chest imprisoned; how they came                           445
  Laden from blooming grove or flowery field,
  And fed him there, alive, month after month,
  Because the goatherd, blessed man! had lips
  Wet with the Muses' nectar.
                              Thus I soothe
  The pensive moments by this calm fire-side,                        450
  And find a thousand bounteous images
  To cheer the thoughts of those I love, and mine.
  Our prayers have been accepted; thou wilt stand
  On Etna's summit, above earth and sea,
  Triumphant, winning from the invaded heavens                       455
  Thoughts without bound, magnificent designs,
  Worthy of poets who attuned their harps
  In wood or echoing cave, for discipline
  Of heroes; or, in reverence to the gods,
  'Mid temples, served by sapient priests, and choirs                460
  Of virgins crowned with roses. Not in vain
  Those temples, where they in their ruins yet
  Survive for inspiration, shall attract
  Thy solitary steps: and on the brink
  Thou wilt recline of pastoral Arethuse;                            465
  Or, if that fountain be in truth no more,
  Then, near some other spring--which, by the name
  Thou gratulatest, willingly deceived--
  I see thee linger a glad votary,
  And not a captive pining for his home.                             470


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1: In the editions of 1850 and 1857, the punctuation is as
follows, but is evidently wrong:

               in the People was my trust:
  And, in the virtues which mine eyes had seen,
  I knew ...

Ed.]


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: The Reign of Terror ended with the downfall of Robespierre
and his "Tribe."--Ed.]


[Footnote B: He refers doubtless to the effect, upon the Government of
the day, of the dread of Revolution in England. There were a few
partisans of France and of the Revolution in England; and the panic
which followed, though irrational, was widespread. The Habeas Corpus Act
was suspended, a Bill was passed against seditious Assemblies, the Press
was prosecuted, some Scottish Whigs who clamoured for reform were
sentenced to transportation, while one Judge expressed regret that the
practice of torture for sedition had fallen into disuse.--Ed.] TWO


[Footnote C: See p. 35 ['French Revolution'].--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Compare 'Ruth', in vol. ii. p. 112:

  'Before me shone a glorious world--
  Fresh as a banner bright, unfurled
  To music suddenly:
  I looked upon those hills and plains,
  And seemed as if let loose from chains,
  To live at liberty.'

Ed.]


[Footnote E: In 1795.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Referring probably to Napoleon's Italian campaign in
1796.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: In 1794 he returned, with intermittent ardour, to the study
of mathematics and physics.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: In the winter of 1794 he went to Halifax, and there joined
his sister, whom he accompanied in the same winter to Kendal, Grasmere,
and Keswick. They stayed for several weeks at Windybrow farm-house, near
Keswick. The brother and sister had not met since the Christmas of 1791.
It is to those "days," in 1794, that he refers.--Ed.]


[Footnote I: Compare in the first book of 'The Recluse', l. 91:

  Her voice was like a hidden Bird that sang;
  The thought of her was like a flash of light,
  Or an unseen companionship.

Ed.]


[Footnote K: In 1804 Bonaparte sent for the Pope to anoint him as
'Empereur des Francais'. Napoleon wished the title to be as remote as
possible from "King of France."--Ed.]


[Footnote L: Coleridge was then living in Sicily, whither he had gone
from Malta. He ascended Etna. See Cottles' 'Early Recollections, chiefly
relating to the late Samuel Taylor Coleridge' (vol. ii. p. 77), and also
compare note [Book 6, Footnote U], p. 230 of this volume.--Ed.]


[Footnote M: Timoleon, one of the greatest of the Greeks, was sent in
command of an expedition to reduce Sicily to order; and was afterwards
the Master, but not the Tyrant, of Syracuse. He colonised it afresh from
Corinth, and from the rest of Sicily; and enacted new laws of a
democratic character, being ultimately the ruler of the whole island;
although he refused office and declined titles, remaining a private
citizen to the end. (See Plutarch's Life of him.)--Ed.]


[Footnote N: See book vi. l. 240.--Ed.]


[Footnote O: Compare 'Paradise Lost', book iv. l. 269.--Ed.]


[Footnote P: Empedpocles, the philosopher of Agrigentum, physicist,
metaphysician, poet, musician, and hierophant.--Ed.]


[Footnote Q: The geometrician of Syracuse.--Ed.]


[Footnote R: The pastoral poet of Syracuse.--Ed.]


[Footnote S: Theocrit. Idyll vii. 78. (Mr. Carter, 1850.)]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK TWELFTH


IMAGINATION AND TASTE, HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED


  Long time have human ignorance and guilt
  Detained us, on what spectacles of woe
  Compelled to look, and inwardly oppressed
  With sorrow, disappointment, vexing thoughts,
  Confusion of the judgment, zeal decayed,                             5
  And, lastly, utter loss of hope itself
  And things to hope for! Not with these began
  Our song, and not with these our song must end.--
  Ye motions of delight, that haunt the sides
  Of the green hills; ye breezes and soft airs,                       10
  Whose subtle intercourse with breathing flowers,
  Feelingly watched, might teach Man's haughty race
  How without injury to take, to give
  Without offence [A]; ye who, as if to show
  The wondrous influence of power gently used,                        15
  Bend the complying heads of lordly pines,
  And, with a touch, shift the stupendous clouds
  Through the whole compass of the sky; ye brooks,
  Muttering along the stones, a busy noise
  By day, a quiet sound in silent night;                              20
  Ye waves, that out of the great deep steal forth
  In a calm hour to kiss the pebbly shore,
  Not mute, and then retire, fearing no storm;
  And you, ye groves, whose ministry it is
  To interpose the covert of your shades,                             25
  Even as a sleep, between the heart of man
  And outward troubles, between man himself,
  Not seldom, and his own uneasy heart:
  Oh! that I had a music and a voice
  Harmonious as your own, that I might tell                           30
  What ye have done for me. The morning shines,
  Nor heedeth Man's perverseness; Spring returns,--
  I saw the Spring return, and could rejoice,
  In common with the children of her love,
  Piping on boughs, or sporting on fresh fields,                      35
  Or boldly seeking pleasure nearer heaven
  On wings that navigate cerulean skies.
  So neither were complacency, nor peace,
  Nor tender yearnings, wanting for my good
  Through these distracted times; in Nature still                     40
  Glorying, I found a counterpoise in her,
  Which, when the spirit of evil reached its height.
  Maintained for me a secret happiness.

    This narrative, my Friend! hath chiefly told
  Of intellectual power, fostering love,                              45
  Dispensing truth, and, over men and things,
  Where reason yet might hesitate, diffusing
  Prophetic sympathies of genial faith:
  So was I favoured--such my happy lot--
  Until that natural graciousness of mind                             50
  Gave way to overpressure from the times
  And their disastrous issues. What availed,
  When spells forbade the voyager to land,
  That fragrant notice of a pleasant shore
  Wafted, at intervals, from many a bower                             55
  Of blissful gratitude and fearless love?
  Dare I avow that wish was mine to see,
  And hope that future times _would_ surely see,
  The man to come, parted, as by a gulph,
  From him who had been; that I could no more                         60
  Trust the elevation which had made me one
  With the great family that still survives
  To illuminate the abyss of ages past,
  Sage, warrior, patriot, hero; for it seemed
  That their best virtues were not free from taint                    65
  Of something false and weak, that could not stand
  The open eye of Reason. Then I said,
  "Go to the Poets, they will speak to thee
  More perfectly of purer creatures;--yet
  If reason be nobility in man,                                       70
  Can aught be more ignoble than the man
  Whom they delight in, blinded as he is
  By prejudice, the miserable slave
  Of low ambition or distempered love?"

    In such strange passion, if I may once more                       75
  Review the past, I warred against myself--
  A bigot to a new idolatry--
  Like a cowled monk who hath forsworn the world,
  Zealously laboured to cut off my heart
  From all the sources of her former strength;                        80
  And as, by simple waving of a wand,
  The wizard instantaneously dissolves
  Palace or grove, even so could I unsoul
  As readily by syllogistic words
  Those mysteries of being which have made,                           85
  And shall continue evermore to make,
  Of the whole human race one brotherhood.

    What wonder, then, if, to a mind so far
  Perverted, even the visible Universe
  Fell under the dominion of a taste                                  90
  Less spiritual, with microscopic view
  Was scanned, as I had scanned the moral world?

    O Soul of Nature! excellent and fair!
  That didst rejoice with me, with whom I, too,
  Rejoiced through early youth, before the winds                      95
  And roaring waters, and in lights and shades
  That marched and countermarched about the hills
  In glorious apparition, Powers on whom
  I daily waited, now all eye and now
  All ear; but never long without the heart                          100
  Employed, and man's unfolding intellect:
  O Soul of Nature! that, by laws divine
  Sustained and governed, still dost overflow
  With an impassioned life, what feeble ones
  Walk on this earth! how feeble have I been                         105
  When thou wert in thy strength! Nor this through stroke
  Of human suffering, such as justifies
  Remissness and inaptitude of mind,
  But through presumption; even in pleasure pleased
  Unworthily, disliking here, and there                              110
  Liking; by rules of mimic art transferred
  To things above all art; but more,--for this,
  Although a strong infection of the age,
  Was never much my habit--giving way
  To a comparison of scene with scene,                               115
  Bent overmuch on superficial things,
  Pampering myself with meagre novelties
  Of colour and proportion; to the moods
  Of time and season, to the moral power,
  The affections and the spirit of the place,                        120
  Insensible. Nor only did the love
  Of sitting thus in judgment interrupt
  My deeper feelings, but another cause,
  More subtle and less easily explained,
  That almost seems inherent in the creature,                        125
  A twofold frame of body and of mind.
  I speak in recollection of a time
  When the bodily eye, in every stage of life
  The most despotic of our senses, gained
  Such strength in _me_ as often held my mind                        130
  In absolute dominion. Gladly here,
  Entering upon abstruser argument,
  Could I endeavour to unfold the means
  Which Nature studiously employs to thwart
  This tyranny, summons all the senses each                          135
  To counteract the other, and themselves,
  And makes them all, and the objects with which all
  Are conversant, subservient in their turn
  To the great ends of Liberty and Power.
  But leave we this: enough that my delights                         140
  (Such as they were) were sought insatiably.
  Vivid the transport, vivid though not profound;
  I roamed from hill to hill, from rock to rock,
  Still craving combinations of new forms,
  New pleasure, wider empire for the sight,                          145
  Proud of her own endowments, and rejoiced
  To lay the inner faculties asleep.
  Amid the turns and counterturns, the strife
  And various trials of our complex being,
  As we grow up, such thraldom of that sense                         150
  Seems hard to shun. And yet I knew a maid, [B]
  A young enthusiast, who escaped these bonds;
  Her eye was not the mistress of her heart;
  Far less did rules prescribed by passive taste,
  Or barren intermeddling subtleties,                                155
  Perplex her mind; but, wise as women are
  When genial circumstance hath favoured them,
  She welcomed what was given, and craved no more;
  Whate'er the scene presented to her view,
  That was the best, to that she was attuned                         160
  By her benign simplicity of life,
  And through a perfect happiness of soul,
  Whose variegated feelings were in this
  Sisters, that they were each some new delight.
  Birds in the bower, and lambs in the green field,                  165
  Could they have known her, would have loved; methought
  Her very presence such a sweetness breathed,
  That flowers, and trees, and even the silent hills,
  And every thing she looked on, should have had
  An intimation how she bore herself                                 170
  Towards them and to all creatures. God delights
  In such a being; for her common thoughts
  Are piety, her life is gratitude.

    Even like this maid, before I was called forth
  From the retirement of my native hills,                            175
  I loved whate'er I saw: nor lightly loved,
  But most intensely; never dreamt of aught
  More grand, more fair, more exquisitely framed
  Than those few nooks to which my happy feet
  Were limited. I had not at that time                               180
  Lived long enough, nor in the least survived
  The first diviner influence of this world,
  As it appears to unaccustomed eyes.
  Worshipping then among the depth of things,
  As piety ordained; could I submit                                  185
  To measured admiration, or to aught
  That should preclude humility and love?
  I felt, observed, and pondered; did not judge,
  Yea, never thought of judging; with the gift
  Of all this glory filled and satisfied.                            190
  And afterwards, when through the gorgeous Alps
  Roaming, I carried with me the same heart:
  In truth, the degradation--howsoe'er
  Induced, effect, in whatsoe'er degree,
  Of custom that prepares a partial scale                            195
  In which the little oft outweighs the great;
  Or any other cause that hath been named;
  Or lastly, aggravated by the times
  And their impassioned sounds, which well might make
  The milder minstrelsies of rural scenes                            200
  Inaudible--was transient; I had known
  Too forcibly, too early in my life,
  Visitings of imaginative power
  For this to last: I shook the habit off
  Entirely and for ever, and again                                   205
  In Nature's presence stood, as now I stand,
  A sensitive being, a _creative_ soul.

    There are in our existence spots of time,
  That with distinct pre-eminence retain
  A renovating virtue, whence, depressed                             210
  By false opinion and contentious thought,
  Or aught of heavier or more deadly weight,
  In trivial occupations, and the round
  Of ordinary intercourse, our minds
  Are nourished and invisibly repaired;                              215
  A virtue, by which pleasure is enhanced,
  That penetrates, enables us to mount,
  When high, more high, and lifts us up when fallen.
  This efficacious spirit chiefly lurks
  Among those passages of life that give                             220
  Profoundest knowledge to what point, and how,
  The mind is lord and master--outward sense
  The obedient servant of her will. Such moments
  Are scattered everywhere, taking their date
  From our first childhood. [C] I remember well,                     225
  That once, while yet my inexperienced hand
  Could scarcely hold a bridle, with proud hopes
  I mounted, and we journeyed towards the hills: [D]
  An ancient servant of my father's house
  Was with me, my encourager and guide:                              230
  We had not travelled long, ere some mischance
  Disjoined me from my comrade; and, through fear
  Dismounting, down the rough and stony moor
  I led my horse, and, stumbling on, at length
  Came to a bottom, where in former times                            235
  A murderer had been hung in iron chains.
  The gibbet-mast had mouldered down, the bones
  And iron case were gone; but on the turf,
  Hard by, soon after that fell deed was wrought,
  Some unknown hand had carved the murderer's name.                  240
  The monumental letters were inscribed
  In times long past; but still, from year to year,
  By superstition of the neighbourhood,
  The grass is cleared away, and to this hour
  The characters are fresh and visible:                              245
  A casual glance had shown them, and I fled,
  Faltering and faint, and ignorant of the road:
  Then, reascending the bare common, saw
  A naked pool that lay beneath the hills,
  The beacon on the summit, and, more near,                          250
  A girl, who bore a pitcher on her head,
  And seemed with difficult steps to force her way
  Against the blowing wind. It was, in truth,
  An ordinary sight; but I should need
  Colours and words that are unknown to man,                         255
  To paint the visionary dreariness
  Which, while I looked all round for my lost guide,
  Invested moorland waste, and naked pool,
  The beacon crowning the lone eminence,
  The female and her garments vexed and tossed                       260
  By the strong wind. When, in the blessed hours
  Of early love, the loved one at my side, [E]
  I roamed, in daily presence of this scene,
  Upon the naked pool and dreary crags,
  And on the melancholy beacon, fell                                 265
  A spirit of pleasure and youth's golden gleam;
  And think ye not with radiance more sublime
  For these remembrances, and for the power
  They had left behind? So feeling comes in aid
  Of feeling, and diversity of strength                              270
  Attends us, if but once we have been strong.
  Oh! mystery of man, from what a depth
  Proceed thy honours. I am lost, but see
  In simple childhood something of the base
  On which thy greatness stands; but this I feel,                    275
  That from thyself it comes, that thou must give,
  Else never canst receive. The days gone by
  Return upon me almost from the dawn
  Of life: the hiding-places of man's power
  Open; I would approach them, but they close.                       280
  I see by glimpses now; when age comes on,
  May scarcely see at all; and I would give,
  While yet we may, as far as words can give,
  Substance and life to what I feel, enshrining,
  Such is my hope, the spirit of the Past                            285
  For future restoration.--Yet another
  Of these memorials;--
                        One Christmas-time, [F]
  On the glad eve of its dear holidays,
  Feverish, and tired, and restless, I went forth
  Into the fields, impatient for the sight                           290
  Of those led palfreys that should bear us home;
  My brothers and myself. There rose a crag,
  That, from the meeting-point of two highways [F]
  Ascending, overlooked them both, far stretched;
  Thither, uncertain on which road to fix                            295
  My expectation, thither I repaired,
  Scout-like, and gained the summit; 'twas a day
  Tempestuous, dark, and wild, and on the grass
  I sate half-sheltered by a naked wall;
  Upon my right hand couched a single sheep,                         300
  Upon my left a blasted hawthorn stood;
  With those companions at my side, I watched,
  Straining my eyes intensely, as the mist
  Gave intermitting prospect of the copse
  And plain beneath. Ere we to school returned,--305
  That dreary time,--ere we had been ten days
  Sojourners in my father's house, he died,
  And I and my three brothers, orphans then,
  Followed his body to the grave. The event,
  With all the sorrow that it brought, appeared                      310
  A chastisement; and when I called to mind
  That day so lately past, when from the crag
  I looked in such anxiety of hope;
  With trite reflections of morality,
  Yet in the deepest passion, I bowed low                            315
  To God, Who thus corrected my desires;
  And, afterwards, the wind and sleety rain,
  And all the business of the elements,
  The single sheep, and the one blasted tree,
  And the bleak music from that old stone wall,                      320
  The noise of wood and water, and the mist
  That on the line of each of those two roads
  Advanced in such indisputable shapes;
  All these were kindred spectacles and sounds
  To which I oft repaired, and thence would drink,                   325
  As at a fountain; and on winter nights,
  Down to this very time, when storm and rain
  Beat on my roof, or, haply, at noon-day,
  While in a grove I walk, whose lofty trees,
  Laden with summer's thickest foliage, rock                         330
  In a strong wind, some working of the spirit,
  Some inward agitations thence are brought,
  Whate'er their office, whether to beguile
  Thoughts over busy in the course they took,
  Or animate an hour of vacant ease.                                 335


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare Shakespeare's "Stealing and giving odour."
('Twelfth Night', act I. scene i. l. 7.)--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Mary Hutchinson.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare the 'Ode, Intimations of Immortality', stanzas v.
and ix.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Either amongst the Lorton Fells, or the north-western
slopes of Skiddaw.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: His sister.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: The year was evidently 1783, but the locality is difficult
to determine. It may have been one or other of two places. Wordsworth's
father died at Penrith, and it was there that the sons went for their
Christmas holiday. The road from Penrith to Hawkshead was by Kirkstone
Pass, and Ambleside; and the "led palfreys" sent to take the boys home
would certainly come through the latter town. Now there are only two
roads from Ambleside to Hawkshead, which meet at a point about a mile
north of Hawkshead, called in the Ordnance map "Outgate." The eastern
road is now chiefly used by carriages, being less hilly and better made
than the western one. The latter would be quite as convenient as the
former for horses. If one were to walk out from Hawkshead village to the
place where the two roads separate at "Outgate," and then ascend the
ridge between them, he would find several places from which he could
overlook _both_ roads "far stretched," were the view not now intercepted
by numerous plantations. (The latter are of comparatively recent
growth.) Dr. Cradock,--to whom I am indebted for this, and for many
other suggestions as to localities alluded to by Wordsworth,--thinks
that

  "a point, marked on the map as 'High Crag' between the two roads, and
  about three-quarters of a mile from their point of divergence, answers
  the description as well as any other. It may be nearly two miles from
  Hawkshead, a distance of which an active eager school-boy would think
  nothing. The 'blasted hawthorn' and the 'naked wall' are probably
  things of the past as much as the 'single sheep.'"

Doubtless this may be the spot,--a green, rocky knoll with a steep face
to the north, where a quarry is wrought, and with a plantation to the
east. It commands a view of both roads. The other possible place is a
crag, not a quarter of a mile from Outgate, a little to the right of the
place where the two roads divide. A low wall runs up across it to the
top, dividing a plantation of oak, hazel, and ash, from the firs that
crown the summit. These firs, which are larch and spruce, seem all of
this century. The top of the crag may have been bare when Wordsworth
lived at Hawkshead. But at the foot of the path along the dividing wall
there are a few (probably older) trees; and a solitary walk beneath
them, at noon or dusk, is almost as suggestive to the imagination, as
repose under the yews of Borrowdale, listening to "the mountain flood"
on Glaramara. There one may still hear the bleak music from the old
stone wall, and "the noise of wood and water," while the loud dry wind
whistles through the underwood, or moans amid the fir trees of the Crag,
on the summit of which there is a "blasted hawthorn" tree. It may be
difficult now to determine the precise spot to which the boy Wordsworth
climbed on that eventful day--afterwards so significant to him, and from
the events of which, he says, he drank "as at a fountain"--but I think
it may have been to one or other of these two crags. (See, however, Mr.
Rawnsley's conjecture in Note V. in the Appendix to this volume, p.
391.)--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK THIRTEENTH


IMAGINATION AND TASTE, HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED--concluded.


  From Nature doth emotion come, and moods
  Of calmness equally are Nature's gift:
  This is her glory; these two attributes
  Are sister horns that constitute her strength.
  Hence Genius, born to thrive by interchange                          5
  Of peace and excitation, finds in her
  His best and purest friend; from her receives
  That energy by which he seeks the truth,
  From her that happy stillness of the mind
  Which fits him to receive it when unsought. [A]                     10

    Such benefit the humblest intellects
  Partake of, each in their degree; 'tis mine
  To speak, what I myself have known and felt;
  Smooth task! for words find easy way, inspired
  By gratitude, and confidence in truth.                              15
  Long time in search of knowledge did I range
  The field of human life, in heart and mind
  Benighted; but, the dawn beginning now
  To re-appear, 'twas proved that not in vain
  I had been taught to reverence a Power                              20
  That is the visible quality and shape
  And image of right reason; that matures
  Her processes by steadfast laws; gives birth
  To no impatient or fallacious hopes,
  No heat of passion or excessive zeal,                               25
  No vain conceits; provokes to no quick turns
  Of self-applauding intellect; but trains
  To meekness, and exalts by humble faith;
  Holds up before the mind intoxicate
  With present objects, and the busy dance                            30
  Of things that pass away, a temperate show
  Of objects that endure; and by this course
  Disposes her, when over-fondly set
  On throwing off incumbrances, to seek
  In man, and in the frame of social life,                            35
  Whate'er there is desirable and good
  Of kindred permanence, unchanged in form
  And function, or, through strict vicissitude
  Of life and death, revolving. Above all
  Were re-established now those watchful thoughts                     40
  Which, seeing little worthy or sublime
  In what the Historian's pen so much delights
  To blazon--power and energy detached
  From moral purpose--early tutored me
  To look with feelings of fraternal love                             45
  Upon the unassuming things that hold
  A silent station in this beauteous world.

    Thus moderated, thus composed, I found
  Once more in Man an object of delight,
  Of pure imagination, and of love;                                   50
  And, as the horizon of my mind enlarged,
  Again I took the intellectual eye
  For my instructor, studious more to see
  Great truths, than touch and handle little ones.
  Knowledge was given accordingly; my trust                           55
  Became more firm in feelings that had stood
  The test of such a trial; clearer far
  My sense of excellence--of right and wrong:
  The promise of the present time retired
  Into its true proportion; sanguine schemes,                         60
  Ambitious projects, pleased me less; I sought
  For present good in life's familiar face,
  And built thereon my hopes of good to come.

    With settling judgments now of what would last
  And what would disappear; prepared to find                          65
  Presumption, folly, madness, in the men
  Who thrust themselves upon the passive world
  As Rulers of the world; to see in these,
  Even when the public welfare is their aim,
  Plans without thought, or built on theories                         70
  Vague and unsound; and having brought the books
  Of modern statists to their proper test,
  Life, human life, with all its sacred claims
  Of sex and age, and heaven-descended rights,
  Mortal, or those beyond the reach of death;                         75
  And having thus discerned how dire a thing
  Is worshipped in that idol proudly named
  "The Wealth of Nations," _where_ alone that wealth
  Is lodged, and how increased; and having gained
  A more judicious knowledge of the worth                             80
  And dignity of individual man,
  No composition of the brain, but man
  Of whom we read, the man whom we behold
  With our own eyes--I could not but inquire--
  Not with less interest than heretofore,                             85
  But greater, though in spirit more subdued--
  Why is this glorious creature to be found
  One only in ten thousand? What one is,
  Why may not millions be? What bars are thrown
  By Nature in the way of such a hope?                                90
  Our animal appetites and daily wants,
  Are these obstructions insurmountable?
  If not, then others vanish into air.
  "Inspect the basis of the social pile:
  Inquire," said I, "how much of mental power                         95
  And genuine virtue they possess who live
  By bodily toil, labour exceeding far
  Their due proportion, under all the weight
  Of that injustice which upon ourselves
  Ourselves entail." Such estimate to frame                          100
  I chiefly looked (what need to look beyond?)
  Among the natural abodes of men,
  Fields with their rural works; [B] recalled to mind
  My earliest notices; with these compared
  The observations made in later youth,                              105
  And to that day continued.--For, the time
  Had never been when throes of mighty Nations
  And the world's tumult unto me could yield,
  How far soe'er transported and possessed,
  Full measure of content; but still I craved                        110
  An intermingling of distinct regards
  And truths of individual sympathy
  Nearer ourselves. Such often might be gleaned
  From the great City, else it must have proved
  To me a heart-depressing wilderness;                               115
  But much was wanting: therefore did I turn
  To you, ye pathways, and ye lonely roads;
  Sought you enriched with everything I prized,
  With human kindnesses and simple joys.

    Oh! next to one dear state of bliss, vouchsafed                  120
  Alas! to few in this untoward world,
  The bliss of walking daily in life's prime
  Through field or forest with the maid we love,
  While yet our hearts are young, while yet we breathe
  Nothing but happiness, in some lone nook,                          125
  Deep vale, or any where, the home of both,
  From which it would be misery to stir:
  Oh! next to such enjoyment of our youth,
  In my esteem, next to such dear delight,
  Was that of wandering on from day to day                           130
  Where I could meditate in peace, and cull
  Knowledge that step by step might lead me on
  To wisdom; or, as lightsome as a bird
  Wafted upon the wind from distant lands,
  Sing notes of greeting to strange fields or groves,                135
  Which lacked not voice to welcome me in turn:
  And, when that pleasant toil had ceased to please,
  Converse with men, where if we meet a face
  We almost meet a friend, on naked heaths
  With long long ways before, by cottage bench,                      140
  Or well-spring where the weary traveller rests.

    Who doth not love to follow with his eye
  The windings of a public way? the sight,
  Familiar object as it is, hath wrought
  On my imagination since the morn                                   145
  Of childhood, when a disappearing line,
  One daily present to my eyes, that crossed
  The naked summit of a far-off hill
  Beyond the limits that my feet had trod,
  Was like an invitation into space                                  150
  Boundless, or guide into eternity. [C]
  Yes, something of the grandeur which invests
  The mariner who sails the roaring sea
  Through storm and darkness, early in my mind
  Surrounded, too, the wanderers of the earth;                       155
  Grandeur as much, and loveliness far more.
  Awed have I been by strolling Bedlamites;
  From many other uncouth vagrants (passed
  In fear) have walked with quicker step; but why
  Take note of this? When I began to enquire,                        160
  To watch and question those I met, and speak
  Without reserve to them, the lonely roads
  Were open schools in which I daily read
  With most delight the passions of mankind,
  Whether by words, looks, sighs, or tears, revealed;                165
  There saw into the depth of human souls,
  Souls that appear to have no depth at all
  To careless eyes. And-now convinced at heart
  How little those formalities, to which
  With overweening trust alone we give                               170
  The name of Education, have to do
  With real feeling and just sense; how vain
  A correspondence with the talking world
  Proves to the most; and called to make good search
  If man's estate, by doom of Nature yoked                           175
  With toil, be therefore yoked with ignorance;
  If virtue be indeed so hard to rear,
  And intellectual strength so rare a boon--
  I prized such walks still more, for there I found
  Hope to my hope, and to my pleasure peace                          180
  And steadiness, and healing and repose
  To every angry passion. There I heard,
  From mouths of men obscure and lowly, truths
  Replete with honour; sounds in unison
  With loftiest promises of good and fair.                           185

    There are who think that strong affection, love [D]
  Known by whatever name, is falsely deemed
  A gift, to use a term which they would use,
  Of vulgar nature; that its growth requires
  Retirement, leisure, language purified                             190
  By manners studied and elaborate;
  That whoso feels such passion in its strength
  Must live within the very light and air
  Of courteous usages refined by art.
  True is it, where oppression worse than death                      195
  Salutes the being at his birth, where grace
  Of culture hath been utterly unknown,
  And poverty and labour in excess
  From day to day pre-occupy the ground
  Of the affections, and to Nature's self                            200
  Oppose a deeper nature; there, indeed,
  Love cannot be; nor does it thrive with ease
  Among the close and overcrowded haunts
  Of cities, where the human heart is sick,
  And the eye feeds it not, and cannot feed.                         205
  --Yes, in those wanderings deeply did I feel
  How we mislead each other; above all,
  How books mislead us, seeking their reward
  From judgments of the wealthy Few, who see
  By artificial lights; how they debase                              210
  The Many for the pleasure of those Few;
  Effeminately level down the truth
  To certain general notions, for the sake
  Of being understood at once, or else
  Through want of better knowledge in the heads                      215
  That framed them; nattering self-conceit with words,
  That, while they most ambitiously set forth
  Extrinsic differences, the outward marks
  Whereby society has parted man
  From man, neglect the universal heart.                             220

    Here, calling up to mind what then I saw,
  A youthful traveller, and see daily now
  In the familiar circuit of my home,
  Here might I pause, and bend in reverence
  To Nature, and the power of human minds,                           225
  To men as they are men within themselves.
  How oft high service is performed within,
  When all the external man is rude in show,--
  Not like a temple rich with pomp and gold,
  But a mere mountain chapel, that protects                          230
  Its simple worshippers from sun and shower.
  Of these, said I, shall be my song; of these,
  If future years mature me for the task,
  Will I record the praises, making verse
  Deal boldly with substantial things; in truth                      235
  And sanctity of passion, speak of these,
  That justice may be done, obeisance paid
  Where it is due: thus haply shall I teach,
  Inspire, through unadulterated ears
  Pour rapture, tenderness, and hope,--my theme                      240
  No other than the very heart of man,
  As found among the best of those who live,
  Not unexalted by religious faith,
  Nor uninformed by books, good books, though few,
  In Nature's presence: thence may I select                          245
  Sorrow, that is not sorrow, but delight;
  And miserable love, that is not pain
  To hear of, for the glory that redounds
  Therefrom to human kind, and what we are.
  Be mine to follow with no timid step                               250
  Where knowledge leads me: it shall be my pride
  That I have dared to tread this holy ground,
  Speaking no dream, but things oracular;
  Matter not lightly to be heard by those
  Who to the letter of the outward promise                           255
  Do read the invisible soul; by men adroit
  In speech, and for communion with the world
  Accomplished; minds whose faculties are then
  Most active when they are most eloquent,
  And elevated most when most admired.                               260
  Men may be found of other mould than these,
  Who are their own upholders, to themselves
  Encouragement, and energy, and will,
  Expressing liveliest thoughts in lively words
  As native passion dictates. Others, too,                           265
  There are among the walks of homely life
  Still higher, men for contemplation framed,
  Shy, and unpractised in the strife of phrase;
  Meek men, whose very souls perhaps would sink
  Beneath them, summoned to such intercourse:                        270
  Theirs is the language of the heavens, the power,
  The thought, the image, and the silent joy:
  Words are but under-agents in their souls;
  When they are grasping with their greatest strength,
  They do not breathe among them: this I speak                       275
  In gratitude to God, Who feeds our hearts
  For His own service; knoweth, loveth us,
  When we are unregarded by the world.

    Also, about this time did I receive
  Convictions still more strong than heretofore,                     280
  Not only that the inner frame is good,
  And graciously composed, but that, no less,
  Nature for all conditions wants not power
  To consecrate, if we have eyes to see,
  The outside of her creatures, and to breathe                       285
  Grandeur upon the very humblest face
  Of human life. I felt that the array
  Of act and circumstance, and visible form,
  Is mainly to the pleasure of the mind
  What passion makes them; that meanwhile the forms                  290
  Of Nature have a passion in themselves,
  That intermingles with those works of man
  To which she summons him; although the works
  Be mean, have nothing lofty of their own;
  And that the Genius of the Poet hence                              295
  May boldly take his way among mankind
  Wherever Nature leads; that he hath stood
  By Nature's side among the men of old,
  And so shall stand for ever. Dearest Friend!
  If thou partake the animating faith                                300
  That Poets, even as Prophets, each with each
  Connected in a mighty scheme of truth,
  Have each his own peculiar faculty,
  Heaven's gift, a sense that fits him to perceive
  Objects unseen before, thou wilt not blame                         305
  The humblest of this band who dares to hope
  That unto him hath also been vouchsafed
  An insight that in some sort he possesses,
  A privilege whereby a work of his,
  Proceeding from a source of untaught things,                       310
  Creative and enduring, may become
  A power like one of Nature's. To a hope
  Not less ambitious once among the wilds
  Of Sarum's Plain, [E] my youthful spirit was raised;
  There, as I ranged at will the pastoral downs                      315
  Trackless and smooth, or paced the bare white roads
  Lengthening in solitude their dreary line,
  Time with his retinue of ages fled
  Backwards, nor checked his flight until I saw
  Our dim ancestral Past in vision clear;                            320
  Saw multitudes of men, and, here and there,
  A single Briton clothed in wolf-skin vest,
  With shield and stone-axe, stride across the wold;
  The voice of spears was heard, the rattling spear
  Shaken by arms of mighty bone, in strength,                        325
  Long mouldered, of barbaric majesty.
  I called on Darkness--but before the word
  Was uttered, midnight darkness seemed to take
  All objects from my sight; and lo! again
  The Desert visible by dismal flames;                               330
  It is the sacrificial altar, fed
  With living men--how deep the groans! the voice
  Of those that crowd the giant wicker thrills
  The monumental hillocks, and the pomp
  Is for both worlds, the living and the dead.                       335
  At other moments (for through that wide waste
  Three summer days I roamed) where'er the Plain
  Was figured o'er with circles, lines, or mounds, [F]
  That yet survive, a work, as some divine,
  Shaped by the Druids, so to represent                              340
  Their knowledge of the heavens, and image forth
  The constellations; gently was I charmed
  Into a waking dream, a reverie
  That, with believing eyes, where'er I turned,
  Beheld long-bearded teachers, with white wands                     345
  Uplifted, pointing to the starry sky,
  Alternately, and plain below, while breath
  Of music swayed their motions, and the waste
  Rejoiced with them and me in those sweet sounds.

    This for the past, and things that may be viewed                 350
  Or fancied in the obscurity of years
  From monumental hints: and thou, O Friend!
  Pleased with some unpremeditated strains
  That served those wanderings to beguile, [G] hast said
  That then and there my mind had exercised                          355
  Upon the vulgar forms of present things,
  The actual world of our familiar days,
  Yet higher power; had caught from them a tone,
  An image, and a character, by books
  Not hitherto reflected. [H] Call we this                           360
  A partial judgment--and yet why? for _then_
  We were as strangers; and I may not speak
  Thus wrongfully of verse, however rude,
  Which on thy young imagination, trained
  In the great City, broke like light from far.                      365
  Moreover, each man's Mind is to herself
  Witness and judge; and I remember well
  That in life's every-day appearances
  I seemed about this time to gain clear sight
  Of a new world--a world, too, that was fit                         370
  To be transmitted, and to other eyes
  Made visible; as ruled by those fixed laws
  Whence spiritual dignity originates,
  Which do both give it being and maintain
  A balance, an ennobling interchange                                375
  Of action from without and from within;
  The excellence, pure function, and best power
  Both of the object seen, and eye that sees.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Compare 'Expostulation and Reply', vol. i. p. 273:

  'Nor less I deem that there are Powers
  Which of themselves our minds impress;
  That we can feed this mind of ours
  In a wise passiveness.

  Think you, 'mid all this mighty sum
  Of things for ever speaking,
  That nothing of itself will come,
  But we must still be seeking?'

Mr. William Davies writes:

  "Is he absolutely right in attributing these powers to the objects of
  Nature, which are only symbols after all? Is there not a more
  penetrative and ethereal perceptive power in the human mind, which is
  able to transfer itself immediately to the spiritual plane,
  transcending that of visible Nature? Plato saw it; the old Vedantist
  still more clearly--and what is more--reached it. He arrived at the
  knowledge and perception of essential Being: though he could neither
  define nor limit, in a human formula, because it is undefinable and
  illimitable, but positive and abstract, universally diffused, 'smaller
  than small, greater than great,' the internal Light, Monitor, Guide,
  Rest, waiting to be seen, recognised, and known in every heart; not
  depending on the powers of Nature for enlightenment and instruction,
  but itself enlightening and instructing: not merely a receptive, but
  the motive power of Nature; which bestows _itself_ upon Nature, and
  only receives from it that which it bestows. Is it not, as he says
  farther on, better 'to see great truths,' even if not so strictly in
  line and form, 'touch and handle little ones,' to take the highest
  point of view we can reach, not a lower one? And surely it is a higher
  thing to rule over and subdue Nature, than to lie ruled and subdued by
  it? The highest form of Religion has always done this."

Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare 'The Old Cumberland Beggar', l. 49 (vol. i. p.
301).--Ed.]


[Footnote C: For a hint in reference to this road, I am indebted to the
late Dr. Henry Dodgson of Cockermouth. Referring to my suggestion that
it might be the road from Cockermouth to Bridekirk, he wrote (July
1878),

  "I scarcely think that road answers to the description. The hill over
  which it goes is not naked but well wooded, and has probably been so
  for many years. Besides, it is not visible from Wordsworth's house,
  nor from the garden behind it. This garden extends from the house to
  the river Derwent, from which it is separated by a wall, with a raised
  terraced walk on the inner side, and nearly on a level with the top. I
  understand that this terrace was in existence in the poet's time....
  Its direction is nearly due east and west; and looking eastward from
  it, there is a hill which bounds the view in that direction, and which
  fully corresponds to the description in 'The Prelude'. It is from one
  and a half to two miles distant, of considerable height, is bare and
  destitute of trees, and has a road going directly over its summit, as
  seen from the terrace in Wordsworth's garden. This road is now used
  only as a footpath; but, fifty or sixty years ago it was the highroad
  to Isel, a hamlet on the Derwent, about three and a half miles from
  Cockermouth, in the direction of Bassenthwaite Lake. The hill is
  locally called 'the Hay,' but on the Ordnance map it is marked 'Watch
  Hill.'"

There can be little doubt as to the accuracy of this suggestion. No
other hill-road is visible from the house or garden at Cockermouth. The
view from the front of the old mansion is limited by houses, doubtless
more so now than in last century; but there is no hill towards the
Lorton Fells on the south or south-east, with a road over it, visible
from any part of the town. Besides, as this was a very early experience
of Wordsworth's--it was in "the morn of childhood" that the road was
"daily present to his sight"--it must have been seen, either from the
house or from the garden. It is almost certain that he refers to the
path over the Hay or Watch Hill, which he and his "sister Emmeline"
could see daily from the high terrace, at the foot of their garden in
Cockermouth, where they used to "chase the butterfly" and visit the
"sparrow's nest" in the "impervious shelter" of privet and roses.

Dr. Cradock wrote to me (January 1886),

  "an old map of the county round about Keswick, including Cockermouth,
  dated 1789, entirely confirms Dr. Dodgson's statement. The road over
  'Hay Hill' is marked clearly as a carriage road to Isel. The miles are
  marked on the map. The 'summit' of the hill is 'naked': for the map
  marks woods, where they existed, and none are marked on Hay
  Hill."--Ed.]


[Footnote D: A part of the following paragraph is written with sundry
variations of text, in Dorothy Wordsworth's MS. book, dated May to
December 1802.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: In the summer of 1793, on his return from the Isle of
Wight, and before proceeding to Bristol and Wales, he wandered with his
friend William Calvert over Salisbury plain for three days.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Compare the reference to "Sarum's naked plain" in the third
book of 'The Excursion', l. 148.--Ed.]


[Footnote G: The reference is to 'Guilt and Sorrow'. See the
introductory, and the Fenwick, note to this poem, in vol. i. pp.
77-79.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: Coleridge read 'Descriptive Sketches' when an undergraduate
at Cambridge in 1793--before the two men had met--and wrote thus of
them:

  "Seldom, if ever, was the emergence of a great and original poetic
  genius above the literary horizon more evidently announced."

See 'Biographia Literaria', i. p. 25 (edition 1842).--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





BOOK FOURTEENTH


CONCLUSION


  In one of those excursions (may they ne'er
  Fade from remembrance!) through the Northern tracts
  Of Cambria ranging with a youthful friend, [A]
  I left Bethgelert's huts at couching-time,
  And westward took my way, to see the sun                             5
  Rise from the top of Snowdon. To the door
  Of a rude cottage at the mountain's base
  We came, and roused the shepherd who attends
  The adventurous stranger's steps, a trusty guide;
  Then, cheered by short refreshment, sallied forth.                  10

    It was a close, warm, breezeless summer night,
  Wan, dull, and glaring, with a dripping fog
  Low-hung and thick that covered all the sky;
  But, undiscouraged, we began to climb
  The mountain-side. The mist soon girt us round,                     15
  And, after ordinary travellers' talk
  With our conductor, pensively we sank
  Each into commerce with his private thoughts:
  Thus did we breast the ascent, and by myself
  Was nothing either seen or heard that checked                       20
  Those musings or diverted, save that once
  The shepherd's lurcher, who, among the crags,
  Had to his joy unearthed a hedgehog, teased
  His coiled-up prey with barkings turbulent.
  This small adventure, for even such it seemed                       25
  In that wild place and at the dead of night,
  Being over and forgotten, on we wound
  In silence as before. With forehead bent
  Earthward, as if in opposition set
  Against an enemy, I panted up                                       30
  With eager pace, and no less eager thoughts.
  Thus might we wear a midnight hour away,
  Ascending at loose distance each from each,
  And I, as chanced, the foremost of the band;
  When at my feet the ground appeared to brighten,                    35
  And with a step or two seemed brighter still;
  Nor was time given to ask or learn the cause,
  For instantly a light upon the turf
  Fell like a flash, and lo! as I looked up,
  The Moon hung naked in a firmament                                  40
  Of azure without cloud, and at my feet
  Rested a silent sea of hoary mist.
  A hundred hills their dusky backs upheaved
  All over this still ocean; and beyond,
  Far, far beyond, the solid vapours stretched,                       45
  In headlands, tongues, and promontory shapes,
  Into the main Atlantic, that appeared
  To dwindle, and give up his majesty,
  Usurped upon far as the sight could reach.
  Not so the ethereal vault; encroachment none                        50
  Was there, nor loss; only the inferior stars
  Had disappeared, or shed a fainter light
  In the clear presence of the full-orbed Moon,
  Who, from her sovereign elevation, gazed
  Upon the billowy ocean, as it lay                                   55
  All meek and silent, save that through a rift--
  Not distant from the shore whereon we stood,
  A fixed, abysmal, gloomy, breathing-place--
  Mounted the roar of waters, torrents, streams
  Innumerable, roaring with one voice!                                60
  Heard over earth and sea, and, in that hour,
  For so it seemed, felt by the starry heavens.

    When into air had partially dissolved
  That vision, given to spirits of the night
  And three chance human wanderers, in calm thought                   65
  Reflected, it appeared to me the type
  Of a majestic intellect, its acts
  And its possessions, what it has and craves,
  What in itself it is, and would become.
  There I beheld the emblem of a mind                                 70
  That feeds upon infinity, that broods
  Over the dark abyss, [B] intent to hear
  Its voices issuing forth to silent light
  In one continuous stream; a mind sustained
  By recognitions of transcendent power,                              75
  In sense conducting to ideal form,
  In soul of more than mortal privilege.
  One function, above all, of such a mind
  Had Nature shadowed there, by putting forth,
  'Mid circumstances awful and sublime,                               80
  That mutual domination which she loves
  To exert upon the face of outward things,
  So moulded, joined, abstracted, so endowed
  With interchangeable supremacy,
  That men, least sensitive, see, hear, perceive,                     85
  And cannot choose but feel. The power, which all
  Acknowledge when thus moved, which Nature thus
  To bodily sense exhibits, is the express
  Resemblance of that glorious faculty
  That higher minds bear with them as their own.                      90
  This is the very spirit in which they deal
  With the whole compass of the universe:
  They from their native selves can send abroad
  Kindred mutations; for themselves create
  A like existence; and, whene'er it dawns                            95
  Created for them, catch it, or are caught
  By its inevitable mastery,
  Like angels stopped upon the wind by sound
  Of harmony from Heaven's remotest spheres.
  Them the enduring and the transient both                           100
  Serve to exalt; they build up greatest things
  From least suggestions; ever on the watch,
  Willing to work and to be wrought upon,
  They need not extraordinary calls
  To rouse them; in a world of life they live,                       105
  By sensible impressions not enthralled,
  But by their quickening impulse made more prompt
  To hold fit converse with the spiritual world,
  And with the generations of mankind
  Spread over time, past, present, and to come,                      110
  Age after age, till Time shall be no more.
  Such minds are truly from the Deity,
  For they are Powers; and hence the highest bliss
  That flesh can know is theirs--the consciousness
  Of Whom they are, habitually infused                               115
  Through every image and through every thought,
  And all affections by communion raised
  From earth to heaven, from human to divine;
  Hence endless occupation for the Soul,
  Whether discursive or intuitive; [C]                               120
  Hence cheerfulness for acts of daily life,
  Emotions which best foresight need not fear,
  Most worthy then of trust when most intense
  Hence, amid ills that vex and wrongs that crush
  Our hearts--if here the words of Holy Writ                         125
  May with fit reverence be applied--that peace
  Which passeth understanding, that repose
  In moral judgments which from this pure source
  Must come, or will by man be sought in vain.

    Oh! who is he that hath his whole life long                      130
  Preserved, enlarged, this freedom in himself?
  For this alone is genuine liberty:
  Where is the favoured being who hath held
  That course unchecked, unerring, and untired,
  In one perpetual progress smooth and bright?--135
  A humbler destiny have we retraced,
  And told of lapse and hesitating choice,
  And backward wanderings along thorny ways:
  Yet--compassed round by mountain solitudes,
  Within whose solemn temple I received                              140
  My earliest visitations, careless then
  Of what was given me; and which now I range,
  A meditative, oft a suffering man--
  Do I declare--in accents which, from truth
  Deriving cheerful confidence, shall blend                          145
  Their modulation with these vocal streams--
  That, whatsoever falls my better mind,
  Revolving with the accidents of life,
  May have sustained, that, howsoe'er misled,
  Never did I, in quest of right and wrong,                          150
  Tamper with conscience from a private aim;
  Nor was in any public hope the dupe
  Of selfish passions; nor did ever yield
  Wilfully to mean cares or low pursuits,
  But shrunk with apprehensive jealousy                              155
  From every combination which might aid
  The tendency, too potent in itself,
  Of use and custom to bow down the soul
  Under a growing weight of vulgar sense,
  And substitute a universe of death                                 160
  For that which moves with light and life informed,
  Actual, divine, and true. To fear and love,
  To love as prime and chief, for there fear ends,
  Be this ascribed; to early intercourse,
  In presence of sublime or beautiful forms,                         165
  With the adverse principles of pain and joy--
  Evil, as one is rashly named by men
  Who know not what they speak. By love subsists
  All lasting grandeur, by pervading love;
  That gone, we are as dust.--Behold the fields                      170
  In balmy spring-time full of rising flowers
  And joyous creatures; see that pair, the lamb
  And the lamb's mother, and their tender ways
  Shall touch thee to the heart; thou callest this love,
  And not inaptly so, for love it is,                                175
  Far as it carries thee. In some green bower
  Rest, and be not alone, but have thou there
  The One who is thy choice of all the world:
  There linger, listening, gazing, with delight
  Impassioned, but delight how pitiable!                             180
  Unless this love by a still higher love
  Be hallowed, love that breathes not without awe;
  Love that adores, but on the knees of prayer,
  By heaven inspired; that frees from chains the soul,
  Lifted, in union with the purest, best,                            185
  Of earth-born passions, on the wings of praise
  Bearing a tribute to the Almighty's Throne.

    This spiritual Love acts not nor can exist
  Without Imagination, which, in truth,
  Is but another name for absolute power                             190
  And clearest insight, amplitude of mind,
  And Reason in her most exalted mood.
  This faculty hath been the feeding source
  Of our long labour: we have traced the stream
  From the blind cavern whence is faintly heard                      195
  Its natal murmur; followed it to light
  And open day; accompanied its course
  Among the ways of Nature, for a time
  Lost sight of it bewildered and engulphed:
  Then given it greeting as it rose once more                        200
  In strength, reflecting from its placid breast
  The works of man and face of human life;
  And lastly, from its progress have we drawn
  Faith in life endless, the sustaining thought
  Of human Being, Eternity, and God.                                 205

    Imagination having been our theme,
  So also hath that intellectual Love,
  For they are each in each, and cannot stand
  Dividually.--Here must thou be, O Man!
  Power to thyself; no Helper hast thou here;                        210
  Here keepest thou in singleness thy state:
  No other can divide with thee this work:
  No secondary hand can intervene
  To fashion this ability; 'tis thine,
  The prime and vital principle is thine                             215
  In the recesses of thy nature, far
  From any reach of outward fellowship,
  Else is not thine at all. But joy to him,
  Oh, joy to him who here hath sown, hath laid
  Here, the foundation of his future years!                          220
  For all that friendship, all that love can do,
  All that a darling countenance can look
  Or dear voice utter, to complete the man,
  Perfect him, made imperfect in himself,
  All shall be his: and he whose soul hath risen                     225
  Up to the height of feeling intellect
  Shall want no humbler tenderness; his heart
  Be tender as a nursing mother's heart;
  Of female softness shall his life be full,
  Of humble cares and delicate desires,                              230
  Mild interests and gentlest sympathies.

  Child of my parents! Sister of my soul!
  Thanks in sincerest verse have been elsewhere
  Poured out [D] for all the early tenderness
  Which I from thee imbibed: and 'tis most true                      235
  That later seasons owed to thee no less;
  For, spite of thy sweet influence and the touch
  Of kindred hands that opened out the springs
  Of genial thought in childhood, and in spite
  Of all that unassisted I had marked                                240
  In life or nature of those charms minute
  That win their way into the heart by stealth
  (Still to the very going-out of youth),
  I too exclusively esteemed _that_ love,
  And sought _that_ beauty, which, as Milton sings,                  245
  Hath terror in it. [E] Thou didst soften down
  This over-sternness; but for thee, dear Friend!
  My soul, too reckless of mild grace, had stood
  In her original self too confident,
  Retained too long a countenance severe;                            250
  A rock with torrents roaring, with the clouds
  Familiar, and a favourite of the stars:
  But thou didst plant its crevices with flowers,
  Hang it with shrubs that twinkle in the breeze,
  And teach the little birds to build their nests                    255
  And warble in its chambers. At a time
  When Nature, destined to remain so long
  Foremost in my affections, had fallen back
  Into a second place, pleased to become
  A handmaid to a nobler than herself,                               260
  When every day brought with it some new sense
  Of exquisite regard for common things,
  And all the earth was budding with these gifts
  Of more refined humanity, thy breath,
  Dear Sister! was a kind of gentler spring                          265
  That went before my steps. Thereafter came
  One whom with thee friendship had early paired;
  She came, no more a phantom to adorn
  A moment, [F] but an inmate of the heart,
  And yet a spirit, there for me enshrined                           270
  To penetrate the lofty and the low;
  Even as one essence of pervading light
  Shines, in the brightest of ten thousand stars,
  And the meek worm that feeds her lonely lamp
  Couched in the dewy grass.
                            With such a theme,                       275
  Coleridge! with this my argument, of thee
  Shall I be silent? O capacious Soul!
  Placed on this earth to love and understand,
  And from thy presence shed the light of love,
  Shall I be mute, ere thou be spoken of?                            280
  Thy kindred influence to my heart of hearts
  Did also find its way. Thus fear relaxed
  Her over-weening grasp; thus thoughts and things
  In the self-haunting spirit learned to take
  More rational proportions; mystery,                                285
  The incumbent mystery of sense and soul,
  Of life and death, time and eternity,
  Admitted more habitually a mild
  Interposition--a serene delight
  In closelier gathering cares, such as become                       290
  A human creature, howsoe'er endowed,
  Poet, or destined for a humbler name;
  And so the deep enthusiastic joy,
  The rapture of the hallelujah sent
  From all that breathes and is, was chastened, stemmed              295
  And balanced by pathetic truth, by trust
  In hopeful reason, leaning on the stay
  Of Providence; and in reverence for duty,
  Here, if need be, struggling with storms, and there
  Strewing in peace life's humblest ground with herbs,               300
  At every season green, sweet at all hours.

    And now, O Friend! this history is brought
  To its appointed close: the discipline
  And consummation of a Poet's mind,
  In everything that stood most prominent,                           305
  Have faithfully been pictured; we have reached
  The time (our guiding object from the first)
  When we may, not presumptuously, I hope,
  Suppose my powers so far confirmed, and such
  My knowledge, as to make me capable                                310
  Of building up a Work that shall endure. [G]
  Yet much hath been omitted, as need was;
  Of books how much! and even of the other wealth
  That is collected among woods and fields,
  Far more: for Nature's secondary grace                             315
  Hath hitherto been barely touched upon,
  The charm more superficial that attends
  Her works, as they present to Fancy's choice
  Apt illustrations of the moral world,
  Caught at a glance, or traced with curious pains.                  320

    Finally, and above all, O Friend! (I speak
  With due regret) how much is overlooked
  In human nature and her subtle ways,
  As studied first in our own hearts, and then
  In life among the passions of mankind,                             325
  Varying their composition and their hue,
  Where'er we move, under the diverse shapes
  That individual character presents
  To an attentive eye. For progress meet,
  Along this intricate and difficult path,                           330
  Whate'er was wanting, something had I gained,
  As one of many schoolfellows compelled,
  In hardy independence, to stand up
  Amid conflicting interests, and the shock
  Of various tempers; to endure and note                             335
  What was not understood, though known to be;
  Among the mysteries of love and hate,
  Honour and shame, looking to right and left,
  Unchecked by innocence too delicate,
  And moral notions too intolerant,                                  340
  Sympathies too contracted. Hence, when called
  To take a station among men, the step
  Was easier, the transition more secure,
  More profitable also; for, the mind
  Learns from such timely exercise to keep                           345
  In wholesome separation the two natures,
  The one that feels, the other that observes.

    Yet one word more of personal concern--
  Since I withdrew unwillingly from France,
  I led an undomestic wanderer's life,                               350
  In London chiefly harboured, whence I roamed,
  Tarrying at will in many a pleasant spot
  Of rural England's cultivated vales
  Or Cambrian solitudes. [H] A youth--(he bore
  The name of Calvert [I]--it shall live, if words                   355
  Of mine can give it life,) in firm belief
  That by endowments not from me withheld
  Good might be furthered--in his last decay
  By a bequest sufficient for my needs
  Enabled me to pause for choice, and walk                           360
  At large and unrestrained, nor damped too soon
  By mortal cares. Himself no Poet, yet
  Far less a common follower of the world,
  He deemed that my pursuits and labours lay
  Apart from all that leads to wealth, or even                       365
  A necessary maintenance insures,
  Without some hazard to the finer sense;
  He cleared a passage for me, and the stream
  Flowed in the bent of Nature. [K]
                                 Having now
  Told what best merits mention, further pains                       370
  Our present purpose seems not to require,
  And I have other tasks. Recall to mind
  The mood in which this labour was begun,
  O Friend! The termination of my course
  Is nearer now, much nearer; yet even then,                         375
  In that distraction and intense desire,
  I said unto the life which I had lived,
  Where art thou? Hear I not a voice from thee
  Which 'tis reproach to hear? Anon I rose
  As if on wings, and saw beneath me stretched                       380
  Vast prospect of the world which I had been
  And was; and hence this Song, which like a lark
  I have protracted, in the unwearied heavens
  Singing, and often with more plaintive voice
  To earth attempered and her deep-drawn sighs,                      385
  Yet centring all in love, and in the end
  All gratulant, if rightly understood.

    Whether to me shall be allotted life,
  And, with life, power to accomplish aught of worth,
  That will be deemed no insufficient plea                           390
  For having given the story of myself,
  Is all uncertain: but, beloved Friend!
  When, looking back, thou seest, in clearer view
  Than any liveliest sight of yesterday,
  That summer, under whose indulgent skies,                          395
  Upon smooth Quantock's airy ridge we roved
  Unchecked, or loitered 'mid her sylvan combs, [L]
  Thou in bewitching words, with happy heart,
  Didst chaunt the vision of that Ancient Man,
  The bright-eyed Mariner, [L] and rueful woes                       400
  Didst utter of the Lady Christabel; [L]
  And I, associate with such labour, steeped
  In soft forgetfulness the livelong hours,
  Murmuring of him who, joyous hap, was found,
  After the perils of his moonlight ride,                            405
  Near the loud waterfall; [L] or her who sate
  In misery near the miserable Thorn; [L]
  When thou dost to that summer turn thy thoughts,
  And hast before thee all which then we were,
  To thee, in memory of that happiness,                              410
  It will be known, by thee at least, my Friend!
  Felt, that the history of a Poet's mind
  Is labour not unworthy of regard:
  To thee the work shall justify itself.

    The last and later portions of this gift                         415
  Have been prepared, not with the buoyant spirits
  That were our daily portion when we first
  Together wantoned in wild Poesy,
  But, under pressure of a private grief, [M]
  Keen and enduring, which the mind and heart,                       420
  That in this meditative history
  Have been laid open, needs must make me feel
  More deeply, yet enable me to bear
  More firmly; and a comfort now hath risen
  From hope that thou art near, and wilt be soon                     425
  Restored to us in renovated health;
  When, after the first mingling of our tears,
  'Mong other consolations, we may draw
  Some pleasure from this offering of my love.

    Oh! yet a few short years of useful life,                        430
  And all will be complete, thy race be run,
  Thy monument of glory will be raised;
  Then, though (too weak to tread the ways of truth)
  This age fall back to old idolatry,
  Though men return to servitude as fast                             435
  As the tide ebbs, to ignominy and shame
  By nations sink together, we shall still
  Find solace--knowing what we have learnt to know,
  Rich in true happiness if allowed to be
  Faithful alike in forwarding a day                                 440
  Of firmer trust, joint labourers in the work
  (Should Providence such grace to us vouchsafe)
  Of their deliverance, surely yet to come.
  Prophets of Nature, we to them will speak
  A lasting inspiration, sanctified                                  445
  By reason, blest by faith: what we have loved,
  Others will love, and we will teach them how;
  Instruct them how the mind of man becomes
  A thousand times more beautiful than the earth
  On which he dwells, above this frame of things                     450
  (Which, 'mid all revolution in the hopes
  And fears of men, doth still remain unchanged)
  In beauty exalted, as it is itself
  Of quality and fabric more divine.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: With Robert Jones, in the summer of 1793.--Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare 'Paradise Lost', book i. l. 21.--Ed.]


[Footnote C: Compare 'Paradise Lost', book v. l. 488.--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Compare 'The Sparrow's Nest', vol. ii. p. 236.--Ed.]


[Footnote E: See 'Paradise Lost', book ix. ll. 490, 491.--Ed.]


[Footnote F: Mary Hutchinson. Compare the lines, p. 2, beginning:

  'She was a Phantom of delight.'

Ed.]


[Footnote G: Compare the preface to 'The Excursion'. "Several years ago,
when the author retired to his native mountains, with the hope of being
enabled to construct a literary work that might live," etc.--Ed.]


[Footnote H: After leaving London, he went to the Isle of Wight and to
Salisbury Plain with Calvert; then to Bristol, the Valley of the Wye,
and Tintern Abbey, alone on foot; thence to Jones' residence in North
Wales at Plas-yn-llan in Denbighshire; with him to other places in North
Wales, thence to Halifax; and with his sister to Kendal, Grasmere,
Keswick, Whitehaven, and Penrith.--Ed.]


[Footnote I: Raisley Calvert.-Ed.]


[Footnote K: His friend, dying in January 1795, bequeathed to Wordsworth
a legacy of ?900. Compare the sonnet, in vol. iv., beginning

  'Calvert! it must not be unheard by them,'

and the 'Life of Wordsworth' in this edition.--Ed.]


[Footnote L: The Wordsworths went to Alfoxden in the end of July, 1797.
It was in the autumn of that year that, with Coleridge,

  'Upon smooth Quantock's airy ridge they roved
  Unchecked, or loitered 'mid her sylvan combs;'

when the latter chaunted his 'Ancient Mariner' and 'Christabel', and
Wordsworth composed 'The Idiot Boy' and 'The Thorn'. The plan of a joint
publication was sketched out in November 1797. (See the Fenwick note to
'We are Seven', vol. i. p. 228.)--Ed.]


[Footnote M: The death of his brother John. Compare the 'Elegiac Verses'
in memory of him, p. 58.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





FROM THE ITALIAN OF MICHAEL ANGELO


Translated 1805?--Published 1807


[Translations from Michael Angelo, done at the request of Mr. Duppa,
whose acquaintance I made through Mr. Southey. Mr. Duppa was engaged in
writing the life of Michael Angelo, and applied to Mr. Southey and
myself to furnish some specimens of his poetic genius.--I. F.]


Compare the two sonnets entitled 'At Florence--from Michael Angelo', in
the "Memorials of a Tour in Italy" in 1837.

The following extract from a letter of Wordsworth's to Sir George
Beaumont, dated October 17, 1805, will cast light on the next three
sonnets.

  "I mentioned Michael Angelo's poetry some time ago; it is the most
  difficult to construe I ever met with, but just what you would expect
  from such a man, shewing abundantly how conversant his soul was with
  great things. There is a mistake in the world concerning the Italian
  language; the poetry of Dante and Michael Angelo proves, that if there
  be little majesty and strength in Italian verse, the fault is in the
  authors, and not in the tongue. I can translate, and have translated
  two books of Ariosto, at the rate, nearly, of one hundred lines a day;
  but so much meaning has been put by Michael Angelo into so little
  room, and that meaning sometimes so excellent in itself, that I found
  the difficulty of translating him insurmountable. I attempted, at
  least, fifteen of the sonnets, but could not anywhere succeed. I have
  sent you the only one I was able to finish; it is far from being the
  best, or most characteristic, but the others were too much for me."

The last of the three sonnets probably belongs to the year 1804, as it
is quoted in a letter to Sir George Beaumont, dated Grasmere, August 6.
The year is not given, but I think it must have been 1804, as he says
that "within the last month," he had written, "700 additional lines" of
'The Prelude'; and that poem was finished in May 1805.

The titles given to them make it necessary to place these Sonnets in the
order which follows.

One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets."--Ed.


I

  Yes! hope may with my strong desire keep pace,
  And I be undeluded, unbetrayed;
  For if of our affections none finds [1] grace
  In sight of Heaven, then, wherefore hath God made
  The world which we inhabit? Better plea                             5
  Love cannot have, than that in loving thee
  Glory to that eternal Peace is paid,
  Who such divinity to thee imparts
  As hallows and makes pure all gentle hearts.
  His hope is treacherous only whose love dies                       10
  With beauty, which is varying every hour;
  But, in chaste hearts uninfluenced by the power
  Of outward change, there blooms a deathless flower,
  That breathes on earth the air of paradise.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANT ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1849.

  ... find ...      1807.]





       *       *       *       *       *





FROM THE SAME


Translated 1805?--Published 1807


One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets."--Ed.



II

  No mortal object did these eyes behold
  When first they met the placid light of thine,
  And my Soul felt her destiny divine, [1]
  And hope of endless peace in me grew bold:
  Heaven-born, the Soul a heaven-ward course must hold;            5
  Beyond the visible world she soars to seek
  (For what delights the sense is false and weak)
  Ideal Form, the universal mould.
  The wise man, I affirm, can find no rest
  In that which perishes: nor will he lend                        10
  His heart to aught which doth on time depend.
  'Tis sense, unbridled will, and not true love,
  That [2] kills the soul: love betters what is best,
  Even here below, but more in heaven above.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1807.

  When first saluted by the light of thine,
  When my soul ...

MS. letter to Sir George Beaumont.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Which ...    1807.]





       *       *       *       *       *





FROM THE SAME. TO THE SUPREME BEING


Translated 1804?--Published 1807


One of the "Miscellaneous Sonnets."--Ed.



III

  The prayers I make will then be sweet indeed
  If Thou the spirit give by which I pray:
  My unassisted heart is barren clay,
  That [1] of its native self can nothing feed:
  Of good and pious works thou art the seed,                     5
  That [2] quickens only where thou say'st it may.
  Unless Thou shew to us thine own true way
  No man can find it: Father! Thou must lead.
  Do Thou, then, breathe those thoughts into my mind
  By which such virtue may in me be bred                        10
  That in thy holy footsteps I may tread;
  The fetters of my tongue do Thou unbind,
  That I may have the power to sing of thee,
  And sound thy praises everlastingly.


       *       *       *       *       *

VARIANTS ON THE TEXT

[Variant 1:

1827.

  Which ...      1807.]


[Variant 2:

1827.

  Which ...      1807.]



The sonnet from which the above is translated, is not wholly by Michael
Angelo, the sculptor and painter, but is taken from patched-up versions
of his poem by his nephew of the same name. Michael Angelo only wrote
the first eight lines, and these have been garbled in his nephew's
edition. The original lines are thus given by Guasti in his edition of
Michael Angelo's Poems (1863) restored to their true reading, from the
autograph MSS. in Rome and Florence.


  Imperfect Sonnet transcribed from "Le Rime di Michelangelo Buonarroti
  Cavate dagli Autografi da Cesare Guasti. Firenze. 1863."



  SONNET LXXXIX. [Vatican].


  Ben sarien dolce le preghiere mie,
    Se virtu mi prestassi da pregarte:
    Nel mio fragil terren non e gia parte
    Da frutto buon, che da se nato sie.

  Tu sol se' seme d' opre caste e pie,
    Che la germoglian dove ne fa' parte:
    Nessun proprio valor puo seguitarte,
    Se no gli mostri le tue sante vie.


The lines are thus paraphrased in prose by the Editor:

  Le mie preghiere sarebbero grate, se tu mi prestassi quella virtu che
  rende efficace il pregare: ma io sono un terreno sterile, in cui non
  nasce spontaneamente frutto che sia buono. Tu solamente sei seme di
  opere caste e pie, le quali germogliano la dove tu ti spargi: e
  nessuna virtu vi ha che da per se possa venirti dietro, se tu stesso
  non le mostri le vie che conducono al bene, e che sono le tue....


The Sonnet as published by the Nephew is as follows:

  Ben sarian dolci le preghiere mie,
    Se virtu mi prestassi da pregarte:
    Nel mio terreno infertil non e parte
    Da produr frutto di virtu natie.

  Tu il seme se' dell' opre giuste e pie,
    Che la germoglian dove ne fai parte:
    Nessun proprio valor puo seguitarte,
    Se non gli mostri le tue belle vie.

  Tu nella mente mia pensieri infondi,
    Che producano in me si vivi effetti,
    Signor, ch' io segua i tuoi vestigi santi.

  E dalla lingua mia chiari, e facondi
    Sciogli della tua gloria ardenti detti,
    Perche sempre io ti lodi, esalti, e canti.


('Le Rime di Michelangelo Buonarroti, Pittore, Scultor e Architetto
cavate degli autografi, e pubblicate da Cesare Guasti'. Firenze,
1863.)-Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





APPENDIX.


NOTE I


"POEMS ON THE NAMING OF PLACES"

'When, to the attractions of the busy world', p. 66

The following variants occur in a MS. Book containing 'Yew Trees',
'Artegal' and 'Elidure', 'Laodamia', 'Black Comb,' etc.--Ed.


  When from the restlessness of crowded life
  Back to my native vales I turned, and fixed
  My habitation in this peaceful spot,
  Sharp season was it of continuous storm
  In deepest winter; and, from week to week,
  Pathway, and lane, and public way were clogged
  With frequent showers of snow ...

  When first attracted by this happy Vale
  Hither I came, among old Shepherd Swains
  To fix my habitation,'t was a time
  Of deepest winter, and from week to week
  Pathway, and lane, and public way were clogged

  When to the { cares and pleasures of the world
              { attractions of the busy world

  Preferring {ease and liberty   }  I chose
             {peace and liberty  }  I chose
             {studious leisure I had chosen
  A habitation in this peaceful vale
  Sharp season {was it of    } continuous storm
               {followed by  } continuous storm





       *       *       *       *       *





NOTE II.--THE HAWKSHEAD BECK


(See pp. 188-89, 'The Prelude', book iv.)


Mr. Rawnsley, formerly of Wray Vicarage--now Canon Rawnsley of
Crosthwaite Vicarage, Keswick--sent me the following letter in reference
to:


  ... that unruly child of mountain birth,
  The famous brook, who, soon as he was boxed
  Within our garden, found himself at once,
  As if by trick insidious and unkind,
  Stripped of his voice and left to dimple down
   ...
  I looked at him and smiled, and smiled again,
   ...
  'Ha,' quoth I, 'pretty prisoner, are you there!'


  "I was not quite content with Dr. Cradock's identification of this
  brook, or of the garden; partly because, beyond the present garden
  square I found, on going up the brook, other garden squares, which
  were much more likely to have been the garden belonging to Anne
  Tyson's cottage, and because in these garden plots the stream was not
  'stripped of his voice,' by the covering of Coniston flags, as is the
  case lower down towards the market place; and partly because--as you
  notice--you can both hear and see the stream through the interstices
  of the flags, and that it can hardly be described (by one who will
  listen) as stripped of its voice.

  At the same time I was bound to admit that in comparing the voice of
  the stream here in the 'channel paved by man's officious care' with
  the sound of it up in the fields beyond the vicarage, nearer its
  birth-place, it certainly might be said to be softer voiced; and as
  the poet speaks of it as 'that unruly child of mountain birth,' it
  looks as if he too had realised the difference.

  But whilst I thought that the identification of Dr. Cradock and
  yourself was very happy (in absence of other possibilities), I had not
  thought that Wordsworth would describe the stream as 'dimpling down,'
  or address it as a 'pretty prisoner.' A smaller stream seemed
  necessary.

  It was, therefore, not a little curious that, in poking about among
  the garden plots on the west bank of the stream, fronting (as nearly
  as I could judge) Anne Tyson's cottage, to seek for remains of the ash
  tree, in which so often the poet--as he lay awake on summer
  nights--had watched 'the moon in splendour couched among the leaves,'
  rocking 'with every impulse of the breeze,' I not only stumbled upon
  the remains of an ash tree--now a 'pollard'--which is evidently
  sprung from a larger tree since decayed (and which for all I know may
  be one of the actual parts of the ancient tree itself); but also had
  the good luck to fall into conversation with a certain Isaac Hodgson,
  who volunteered the following information.

  First, that Wordsworth, it was commonly said, had lodged part of his
  time with one Betty Braithwaite, in the very house called Church Hill
  House.

  She was a widow, and kept a confectionery shop, and 'did a deal of
  baking,' he believed.

  Secondly, that there was a little patch of garden at the back of the
  house, with a famous spring well--still called Old Betty's Well--in
  it, and that only a few paces from where I was then standing by the
  pollard ash.

  On jumping over the fence I found myself on the western side of the
  quaint old Church Hill House, with magnificent views of the whole of
  the western side of Hawkshead Vale; grassy swell and wooded rises
  taking the eye up to the moorland ridge between us and Coniston.

  'But,' said I, 'what about Betty's Well.' 'Oh,' said my friend,
  'that's a noted spring, that never freezes, and always runs; we all
  drink of it, and neighbours send to it. Here it is,' he continued;
  and, gazing down, I saw a little dripping well of water, lustrous,
  clear, coming evidently in continuous force from the springs or secret
  channels up hill, pausing for a moment at the trough, thence falling
  into a box or 'channel paved by man's officious care,' and in a moment
  out of sight and soundless, to pursue its way, 'stripped of its
  voice,' towards the main Town beck, that ran at the north-east border
  of the garden plot. 'Ha, pretty prisoner,' and the words 'dimple down'
  came to my mind at once as appropriate. 'Old Betty's Well gave the
  key-note of the 'famous brook'; and 'boxed within our garden' seemed
  an appropriate and exact description.

  Trace of
                              'the sunny seat
    Round the stone table under the dark pine,'

  was there none. Not so, however, the Ash tree, the remains of which I
  have spoken of. From the bedroom of Betty Braithwaite's house the boy
  could have watched the moon,

                             'while to and fro
    In the dark summit of the waving tree
    She rocked with every impulse of the breeze.'

  'In old times,' said my friend, 'the wall fence ran across the garden,
  just beyond this spring well, so you see it was but a small spot, was
  this garden close.' Yes; but the

                          'crowd of things
    About its narrow precincts all beloved,'

  were known the better, and loved the more on that account. Certainly,
  thought I to myself, here is the famous spring; a brook that
  Wordsworth must have known, and that may have been the centre of
  memory to him in his description of those early Hawkshead days, with
  its metaphor of fountain life.

  May we not, as we gaze on this little fountain well, in a garden plot
  at the back of one of the grey huts of this 'one dear vale,' point as
  with a wand, and say,

    'This portion of the river of his mind
    Came from yon fountain.'

  Is it not possible that the old dame whose

    'Clear though shallow stream of piety,
    Ran on the Sabbath days a fresher course,'

  was Betty Braithwaite, the aged dame who owned the cottage hard by?"


The following additional extract from a letter of Mr. Rawnsley's
(Christmas, 1882) casts light, both on the Hawkshead beck and fountain,
and on the stone seat in the market square, referred to in the fourth
book of 'The Prelude'.

  "Postlethwaite of the Sun Inn at Hawkshead, has a father aged 82, who
  can remember that there was a _stone_ bench, not called old Betty's,
  but Old Jane's Stone, on which she used to spread nuts and cakes for
  the scholars of the Grammar School, but that it did not stand where
  the Market Hall now is, and no one ever remembers a stone or
  stone-bench standing there. This stone or stone-bench stood about
  opposite the Red Lion inn, in front of the little row of houses that
  run east and west, just as you pass out of the village in a northerly
  direction by the Red Lion. This stone or stone-bench is not associated
  with dark pine trees, but they may have passed away root and branch in
  an earlier generation.

  Next and most interesting, I think, as showing that I was right in the
  matter of the _famous fountain,_ or spring in the garden, behind Betty
  Braithwaite's house. There exists in Hawkshead near this house a
  covered-in place or shed, to which all the village repair for their
  drinking-water, and always have done so. It is known by the name of
  the Spout House, and the water--which flows all the year from a
  longish spout, with an overflow one by its side--comes direct from the
  little drop well in Betty B.'s garden, after having its voice stripped
  and boxed therein; and, falling out of the spout into a deep stone
  basin and culvert, runs through the town to join the Town Beck.

  So wedded are the Hawkshead folk to this, their familiar fountainhead,
  that though water is supplied in stand-pipes now from a Reservoir, the
  folks won't have it, and come here to this spout-house, bucket and jug
  in hand, morn, noon and night. I have never seen anything so like a
  continental scene at the gathering at Hawkshead spout-house.

  Lastly, there is a very aged thorn-tree in the churchyard--blown over
  but propped up--in which the forefathers of the hamlet used to sit as
  boys (in the thorn, that is, not the churchyard), and which has been
  worn smooth by many Hawkshead generations. The tradition is, that
  _Wordsworth used to sit a deal in it when at school._"

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





NOTE III.--THE HAWKSHEAD MORNING WALK: SUMMER VACATION


(See p. 197, 'The Prelude', book iv. ll. 323-38)


If the farm-house where Wordsworth spent the evening before this
memorable morning walk was either at Elterwater or High Arnside, and the
homeward pathway led across the ridge of Ironkeld, either by the old
mountain road (now almost disused), or over the pathless fells, there
are two points from either of which the sea might be seen in the
distance. The one is from the heights looking down to the Duddon
estuary, across the Coniston valley; the other is from a spot nearer
Hawkshead, where Morecambe Bay is visible. In the former case "the
meadows and the lower grounds" would be those in Yewdale; in the latter
case, they would be those between Latterbarrow and Hawkshead; and, on
either alternative, the "solid mountains" would be those of the Coniston
group--the Old Man and Wetherlam. It is also possible that the course of
the walk was over the Latterbarrow fells, or heights of Colthouse; but,
from the reference to the sunrise "not unseen" from the copse and field,
through which the "homeward pathway wound," it may be supposed that the
course was south-east, and therefore not over these fells, when his back
would have been to the sun. Dr. Cradock's note [Footnote T to book iv]
to the text (p. 197) sums up all that can "be safely said"; but Mr.
Rawnsley has supplied me with the following interesting remarks:

  "After a careful reading of the passage describing the poet's return
  from a festal night, spent in some farm-house beyond the hills, I am
  quite unable to say that the path from High Arnside over the Ironkeld
  range entirely suits the description. Is it not possible that the lad
  had school-fellows whose parents lived in Yewdale? If he had, and was
  returning from the party in one of the Yewdale farms, he would, as he
  ascended towards Tarn Howes, and faced about south, to gain the main
  Coniston road, by traversing the meadows between Berwick ground and
  the top of the Hawkshead and Coniston Hill, command a view of the sea
  that 'lay laughing at a distance'; and 'near, the solid
  mountains'--Wetherlam and Coniston Old Man--would shine 'bright as the
  clouds.' I think this is likely to have been the poet's track, because
  he speaks of labourers going forth to till the fields; and the Yewdale
  valley is one that is (at its head) chiefly arable, so that he would
  be likelier to have gazed on them there than in the vale of Hawkshead
  itself. One is here, however--as in a former passage, when we fixed on
  Yewdale as the one described as being a 'cultured vale'--obliged to
  remember that in Wordsworth's boyhood wheat was grown more extensively
  than is now the case in these parts. Of course, the Furness Fell,
  above Colthouse, might have been the scene. It is eminently suited to
  the description."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





NOTE IV.--DOROTHY WORDSWORTH AT CAMBRIDGE IN 1808. THE ASH TREE AT ST.
JOHN'S COLLEGE


(See p. 224, 'The Prelude', book vi. ll. 76-94)


The following is an extract from a letter of Dorothy Wordsworth's to
Lady Beaumont at Coleorton, dated "14th August," probably in 1808:


  "We reached Cambridge at half-past nine. In our way to the Inn we
  stopped at the gate of St. John's College to set down one of our
  passengers. The stopping of the carriage roused me from a sleepy
  musing, and I was awe-stricken with the solemnity of the old gateway,
  and the light from a great distance within streaming along the
  pavement. When they told me it was the entrance to 'St. John's'
  College, I was still more affected by the gloomy yet beautiful sight
  before me, for I thought of my dearest brother in his youthful days
  passing through that gateway to his home, and I could have believed
  that I saw him there even then, as I had seen him in the first year of
  his residence. I met with Mr. Clarkson at the Inn, and was, you may
  believe, rejoiced to hear his voice at the coach door. We supped
  together, and immediately after supper I went to bed, and slept well,
  and at 8 o'clock next morning went to Trinity Chapel. There I stood
  for many minutes in silence before the statue of Newton, while the
  organ sounded. I never saw a statue that gave me one hundredth part so
  much pleasure--but pleasure, that is not the word, it is a sublime
  sensation--in harmony with sentiments of devotion to the Divine Being,
  and reverence for the holy places where He is worshipped. We walked in
  the groves all the morning and visited the Colleges. I sought out a
  favourite ash tree which my brother speaks of in his poem on his own
  life--a tree covered with ivy. We dined with a fellow of Peter-House
  in his rooms, and after dinner I went to King's College Chapel. There,
  and everywhere else at Cambridge, I was even much more impressed with
  the effect of the buildings than I had been formerly, and I do believe
  that this power of receiving an enlarged enjoyment from the sight of
  buildings is one of the privileges of our later years. I have this
  moment received a letter from William...."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





NOTE V.--"THE MEETING-POINT OF TWO HIGHWAYS"


(See p. 353, 'The Prelude', book xii. l. 293)


The following extract from a letter of Mr. Rawnsley's casts important
light on a difficult question of localization. Dr. Cradock is inclined
now to select the Outgate Crag, the second of the four places referred
to by Mr. Rawnsley. But the first may have been the place, and the
extract which follows will show how much is yet to be done in this
matter of localizing poetical allusions.

  "As to

                                'the crag,
    That, from the meeting-point of two highways
    Ascending, overlooked them both, far stretched,'

  there seems to be no doubt but that we have four competitors for the
  honour of being the place to which the poet:

                  'impatient for the sight
    Of those led palfreys that should bear them home'

  repaired with his brothers

                       'one Christmas-time,
    On the glad eve of its dear holidays.'

  And unless, as it seems is quite possible, from what one sees in other
  of Wordsworth's poems, he really stood on one of the crags, and then
  in his description drew the picture of the landscape at his feet from
  his memory of what it was as seen from another of the vantage places,
  we need a high crag, rising gradually or abruptly from the actual
  meeting-place of two highways, with, if possible at this distance of
  time, a wall--or traces of it--quite at its summit. (I may mention
  that the wallers in this country still give two hundred years as the
  length of time that a dry wall will stand.) We need also traces of an
  old thorn tree close by. The wall, too, must be so placed on the
  summit of the crag that, as it faces the direction in which the lad is
  looking for his palfrey, it shall afford shelter to him against

                  'the sleety rain,
    And all the business of the elements.'

  It is evident that the lad would be looking out in a north-easterly
  direction, i. e. towards the head of Windermere and Ambleside. So that

                       'the mist,
    That on the line of each of those two roads
    Advanced in such indisputable shapes,'

  was urged by a wind that found the poet at his look-out station, glad
  to have the wall between him and it. Further, there must be in close
  proximity wood and the sound of rushing water, or the lapping of a
  lake wind-driven against the marge, for the boy remembers that 'the
  bleak music from that old stone wall' was mingled with 'the noise of
  wood and water.' The roads spoken of must be two highways, and must be
  capable of being seen for some distance; unless, as it is just
  possible, the epithet 'far-stretched' may be taken as applying not so
  much to the roads, as to the gradual ascent of the crag from the
  meeting-place of the two highways.

  The scene from the crag must be extended, and half plain half
  wood-land; at least one gathers as much from the lines:

                  'as the mist
    Gave intermitting prospect of the copse
    And plain beneath.'

  Lastly, it was a day of driving sleet and mist, and this of itself
  would necessitate that the poet and his brothers should only go to the
  place close to which the ponies must pass, or from which most plainly
  the roads were visible.

  The boys too were

            'feverish, and tired, and restless,'

  and a schoolboy, to gain his point on such a day and on such an
  errand, does not take much account of a mile of country to be
  travelled over.

  So that it is immaterial, I think, to make the distance from Hawkshead
  of either of the four crags or vantage grounds a factor in decision.

  The farther the lads were from home when they met their ponies, the
  longer ride back they would have, and this to schoolboys is matter of
  consideration at such times.

  Taking then a survey of the ground of choice, we have to decide
  whether the crag in question is situated at the first division or main
  split of the road from Ambleside furthest from Hawkshead, or whether
  at the place where the two roads converge again into one nearer
  Hawkshead.

  Whether, that is, the crag above the Pullwyke quarry, at the junction
  of the road to Water Barngates and the road to Wray and Outgate is to
  be selected, about two miles from Hawkshead; or whether we are to fix
  on the spot you have chosen, at the point about a mile north-east of
  Hawkshead, 'called in the ordnance map Outgate.'

  Of the two I incline to the former, for these reasons. The boys could
  not be so certain of 'not missing the ponies', at any other place than
  here at Pullwyke.

  The crag exactly answers the poet's description, a rising ground, the
  meeting-place of two highways. For in the poet's time the old
  Hawkshead and Outgate road at the Pullwyke corner ran at the very foot
  of the rising ground (roughly speaking) parallel to and some 60 to 100
  yards west of the present road from the Pull to Wray.

  It is true that no trace of wall is visible at its summit, but the
  summit has been planted since with trees, and walls are often removed
  at time of planting.

  The poet would have a full view of the main road, down to, and round,
  the Pullwyke Bay; he would see the branch road from the fork, as it
  mounted the Water Barngates Hill, to the west, and would see the other
  road of the fork far-stretched and going south.

  He would also have an extended view of copse and meadow land. He
  might, if the wind were south-easterly, hear the noise of Windermere,
  sobbing in the Pullwyke Bay, and would without doubt hear also the
  roar of the Pull Beck water, as it passed down from the Ironkeld
  slopes on his left towards the lake.

  It might be objected that the poem gives us the idea of a crag which,
  from the Hawkshead side at any rate, would require to be of more
  difficult ascent than this is, to justify the idea of difficulty as
  suggested in the lines:

                'thither I repaired,
    Scout-like, and gained the summit;'

  but I do not think we need read more into the lines than that the boy
  felt--as he scanned the country with his eyes, on the 'qui vive' at
  every rise in the ground--the feelings of a scout, who questions
  constantly the distant prospect.

  And certainly the Pullwyke quarry crag rises most steeply from the
  meeting-point of the two highways.

  Next as to the Outgate crag, which you have chosen. I am out of love
  with it. First, if the lads wanted to make sure of the ponies, they
  would not have ascended it, but would have stayed just at the
  Hawkshead side of Outgate, or at the village itself, at the point of
  convergence of the ways.

  Secondly, the crag can hardly be described as rising from the
  meeting-point of two highways; only one highway passes near it.

  The crag is of so curious a formation geologically, that I can't fancy
  the poet describing his memory of it, without calling it a terraced
  hill, or an ascent by natural terraces.

  Then, again, the prospect is not sufficiently extended from it. The
  stream not near enough, or rather not of size enough, to be heard.
  Blelham Tarn is not too far to have added to the watery sound, it is
  true, but the wind we suppose to have been north-east, and the sound
  of the Blelham Tarn would be much carried away from him.

  The present stone wall is not near the summit, and is of comparatively
  recent date. It is difficult to believe from the slope of the outcrop
  of rock that a wall could ever have been at the summit.

  But there are two other vantage grounds intermediate between those
  extremes, both of which were probably in the mind and memory of the
  poet as he described the scene, and

    'The intermitting prospect of the copse.
    And plain beneath,'

  allowed him by the mist. One of these is the High Crag, about
  three-quarters of a mile from the divergence or convergence of the two
  highways, which Dr. Cradock has selected.

  There can be no doubt that this is the crag 'par excellence' for a
  wide and extended look-out over all the country between Outgate and
  Ambleside. Close at its summit there remain aged thorn trees, but no
  trace of a wall.

  But High Crag can hardly be said to have risen at 'the meeting-point
  of two highways,' unless we are to understand the epithet
  'far-stretched' as applying to the south-western slopes or skirts of
  the hill; and the two highways, the roads between Water Barngates on
  the west, and the bridle road between Pullwyke and Outgate at their
  Outgate junction, and this is rather too far a stretch.

  It is quite true that if bridle paths can be described as highways,
  there may be said to be a meeting-point of these close at the
  north-eastern side of the crag.

  But, remembering that the ponies came from Penrith, the driver was not
  likely to have had any intimate knowledge of these bridle paths;
  while, at the same time, on that misty day, I much question whether
  the boys on the look-out at High Crag could have seen ponies creeping
  along between walled roads at so great a distance as half a mile or
  more.

  And this would seem to have been the problem for them on that day.

  I ought in fairness to say that it is not likely that the roads were
  then (as to-day) walled up high on either side. To-day, even from the
  summit of High Crag, only the head and ears of a pony could be seen as
  it passed up the Water Barngates Road; but at the end of last century
  many of the roads were only partially walled off from the moorlands
  they passed over in the Lake Country.

  Still, as I said, High Crag was a point of vantage that the poet, as a
  lad, must have often climbed, in this part of the country, if he
  wanted to indulge in the delights of panoramic scene.

  There is a wall some hundred yards from the summit, on the
  south-westerly flank of High Crag; near this--at a point close by, two
  large holly trees--the boy might have sheltered himself against the
  north-eastern wind, and have got a closer and better view of the road
  between Barngates and Outgate, and Randy Pike and Outgate.

  Here, too, he could possibly hear the sound of the stream in the
  dingle or woody hollow immediately at his feet; but I am far from
  content with this as being the spot the poet watched from.

  There is again a fourth possible look-out place, to which you will
  remember I directed your attention, nearer Randy Pike. The slope,
  covered with larches, rises up from the Randy Pike Road to a
  precipitous crag which faces north and east.

  From this, a grand view of the country between Randy Pike and Pullwyke
  is obtained, and if the bridle paths might--as is possible, but
  unlikely--be called two highways, then this crag could be spoken of as
  rising from the meeting place of the two highways. For the old
  Hawkshead Road passed along to the east, within calling distance (say
  ninety yards), and a bridle road from Pullwyke, now used chiefly by
  the quarrymen, passed within eighty yards to the west; while it is
  certain that the brook below, when swollen by winter rains, might be
  loud enough to be heard from the copse. This crag is known as Coldwell
  or Caudwell Crag, and is situated about half a mile east-south-east of
  the High Crag.

  It has this much in its favour, that a wall of considerable age crests
  its summit, and one can whilst sitting down on a rock close behind it
  be sheltered from the north and east, and yet obtain an extensive view
  of the subadjacent country. IF it were certain that the ponies when
  they got to Pullwyke did not go up towards Water Barngates, and so to
  Hawkshead, then there is no crag in the district which would so
  thoroughly answer to all the needs of the boys, and to all the points
  of description the poet has placed on record.

  But it is just this IF that makes me decide on the Pullwyke Crag--the
  one first described--as being the actual spot to which, scout-like,
  the schoolboys clomb, on that eventful 'eve of their dear holidays;'
  while, at the same time, it is my firm conviction that Wordsworth--as
  he painted the memories of that event--had also before his mind's eye
  the scene as viewed from Coldwell and High Crag."

Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





NOTE VI.--COLERIDGE'S LINES TO WORDSWORTH, ON HEARING 'THE PRELUDE'
RECITED BY HIM AT COLEORTON, IN 1806


The following is a copy of a version of these 'Lines', sent by Coleridge
to Sir George Beaumont, at Dunmow, Essex, in January, 1807. The
variations, both in the title and in the text, from that which Coleridge
finally adopted (see p. 129), are interesting in many ways:


LINES

To William Wordsworth: Composed for the greater part on the same night
after the finishing of his recitation of the Poem, in Thirteen Books, on
the growth of his own mind.


  O Friend! O Teacher! God's great Gift to me!
  Into my Heart have I received that Lay
  More than historic, that prophetic Lay
  Wherein (high theme by thee first sung aright)
  Of the foundations and the building up                           5
  Of thine own spirit thou hast loved to tell
  What _may_ be told, by words revealable:
  With heavenly breathings, like the secret soul
  Of vernal growth, oft quickening in the heart
  Thoughts, that obey no mastery of words,                        10
  Pure Self-beholdings! Theme as hard as high,
  Of Smiles spontaneous and mysterious Fear!
  The first born they of Reason and twin birth!
  Of tides obedient to external force,
  And currents self-determin'd, as might seem,                    15
  Or by some inner power! Of moments awful,
  Now in thy hidden life, and now abroad,
  When power stream'd from thee, and thy soul receiv'd
  The light reflected, as a light bestow'd!
  Of fancies fair, and milder hours of youth,                     20
  Hybloean murmurs of poetic thought
  Industrious in its joy, in vales and glens
  Native or outland, Lakes and famous Hills;
  Or on the lonely high-road, when the stars
  Were rising; or by secret mountain streams,                     25
  The guides and the companions of thy way!
  Of more than Fancy--of the SOCIAL SENSE
  Distending, and of Man belov'd as Man,
  Where France in all her Towns lay vibrating,
  Even as a Bark becalm'd on sultry seas                          30
  Quivers beneath the voice from Heaven, the burst
  Of Heaven's immediate thunder, when no cloud
  Is visible, or shadow on the main!
  For thou wert there, thy own brows garlanded,
  Amid the tremor of a Realm aglow!                               35
  Amid a mighty nation jubilant!
  When from the general Heart of Human Kind
  Hope sprang forth, like an armed Deity!
  Of that dear Hope afflicted and struck down,
  So summon'd homeward; thenceforth calm and sure,                40
  As from the Watch-tower of Man's absolute Self,
  With light unwaning on her eyes, to look
  Far on--herself a Glory to behold,
  The Angel of the Vision! Then (last strain)
  Of Duty, chosen Laws controlling choice,                        45
  Action and Joy!--an Orphic Tale indeed,
  A Tale divine of high and passionate Thoughts,
  To their own Music chaunted!--

                                A great Bard!
  Ere yet the last strain dying awed the air,
  With steadfast eyes I saw thee in the choir                     50
  Of ever-enduring men. The truly Great
  Have all one age, and from one visible space
  Shed influence: for they, both power and act,
  Are permanent, and Time is not with them,
  Save as it worketh for them, they in it.                        55
  Nor less a sacred Roll, than those of old,
  And to be plac'd, as they, with gradual fame
  Among the Archives of Mankind, thy Work
  Makes audible a linked Song of Truth,
  Of Truth profound a sweet continuous Song                       60
  Not learnt, but native, her own natural notes!
  Dear shall it be to every human heart,
  To me how more than dearest! Me, on whom
  Comfort from thee, and utterance of thy Love,
  Come with such Heights and Depths of Harmony                    65
  Such sense of Wings uplifting, that its might
  Scatter'd and quell'd me, till my Thoughts became
  A bodily Tumult; and thy faithful Hopes,
  Thy Hopes of me, dear Friend! by me unfelt!
  Were troublous to me, almost as a Voice                         70
  Familiar once and more than musical;
  As a dear Woman's Voice to one cast forth, [A]
  A Wanderer with a worn-out heart forlorn,
  Mid Strangers pining with untended wounds.

  O Friend! too well thou know'st, of what sad years              75
  The long suppression had benumbed my soul,
  That, even as Life returns upon the Drown'd,
  The unusual Joy awoke a throng of Pains--
  Keen Pangs of LOVE, awakening, as a Babe,
  Turbulent, with an outcry in the Heart!                         80
  And Fears self-will'd, that shunn'd the eye of Hope,
  And Hope, that scarce would know itself from Fear;
  Sense of past youth, and manhood come in vain,
  And Genius given and Knowledge won in vain;
  And all, which I had cull'd in wood-walks wild,                 85
  And all, which patient Toil had rear'd, and all,
  Commune with THEE had open'd out--but Flowers
  Strew'd on my Corse, and borne upon my Bier,
  In the same Coffin, for the self-same Grave!

  That way no more! and ill beseems it me,                        90
  Who came a Welcomer, in Herald's Guise,
  Singing of Glory and Futurity,
  To wander back on such unhealthful road
  Plucking the Poisons of Self-harm! And ill
  Such intertwine beseems triumphal wreaths                       95
  Strew'd before thy advancing! Thou too, Friend!
  Impair thou not the memory of that hour
  Of thy Communion with my nobler mind
  By pity or grief, already felt too long!
  Nor let my words import more blame than needs.                 100
  The tumult rose and ceas'd: for Peace is nigh
  Where Wisdom's voice has found a list'ning Heart.
  Amid the howl of more than wintry storms
  The Halcyon hears the Voice of vernal Hours,
  Already on the wing!

                       Eve following Eve                         105
  Dear tranquil Time, when the sweet sense of Home
  Is sweetest! Moments, for their own sake hail'd,
  And more desired, more precious for thy Song!
  In silence listening, like a devout child,
  My soul lay passive, by the various strain                     110
  Driven as in surges now, beneath the stars
  With momentary [B] stars of her [C] own birth,
  Fair constellated Foam, still darting off
  Into the Darkness; now a tranquil Sea,
  Outspread and bright, yet swelling to the Moon.                115

  And when--O Friend! my Comforter! my [D] Guide!
  Strong in thyself and powerful to give strength!--
  Thy long sustained Song finally clos'd,
  And thy deep voice had ceas'd--yet thou thyself
  Wert still before mine eyes, and round us both                 120
  That happy Vision of beloved Faces--
  (All whom, I deepliest love--in one room all!)
  Scarce conscious and yet conscious of its close
  I sate, my Being blended in one Thought,
  (Thought was it? or aspiration? or resolve?)                   125
  Absorb'd; yet hanging still upon the Sound--
  And when I rose, I found myself in Prayer.


S. T. COLERIDGE.

'Jany'. 1807.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT

[Footnote A: Different reading on same MS.:

  'To one cast forth, whose Hope had seem'd to die.'

Ed.]


[Footnote B: Compare, as an illustrative note, the descriptive passage
in Satyrane's first Letter in 'Biographia Literaria', beginning, "A
beautiful white cloud of foam," etc.--S.T.C.]


[Footnote C: Different reading on same MS., "'my'."--Ed.]


[Footnote D: Different reading on same MS., "'and'."--Ed.]



In a MS. copy of 'Dejection, An Ode', transcribed for Sir George
Beaumont on the 4th of April 1802--and sent to him, when living with
Lord Lowther at Lowther Hall--there is evidence that the poem was
originally addressed to Wordsworth.

The following lines in this copy can be compared with those finally
adopted:

  'O dearest William! in this heartless mood,
  To other thoughts by yonder throstle woo'd
  All this long eve so balmy and serene
  Have I been gazing on the western sky,'

  ...

  'O William, we _receive_ but what we _give_:
  And in our life alone does Nature live.'

  ...

         'Yes, dearest William! Yes!
  There was a time when though my Path was rough
  This Joy within me dallied with distress.'


The MS. copy is described by Coleridge as "imperfect"; and it breaks off
abruptly at the lines:

  'Suspends what Nature gave me at my birth
  My shaping spirit of Imagination.'

And he continues:

  'I am so weary of this doleful poem, that I must leave off....'

Another MS. copy of this poem, amongst the Coleorton papers, is signed
"S. T. Coleridge to William Wordsworth."    Ed.





       *       *       *       *       *





NOTE VII.--GENERAL BEAUPUY


(See pp. 297 and 302, 'The Prelude', book ix.)


Professor Emile Legouis of Lyons--a thorough student, and a very
competent expounder, of our modern English Literature--supplied me, some
years ago, with numerous facts in reference to Wordsworth's friend
General Beaupuy, and his family, from which I extract the following:

  'The Prelude' gives us very little precise information about the
  republican officer with whom Wordsworth became acquainted in France,
  and on whom he bestowed more praise than on almost any other of his
  contemporaries. We only gather the following facts:--That his name was
  'Beaupuy', that he was quartered at Orleans, with royalist officers,
  sometime between November 1791 and the spring of 1792, and that

    'He perished fighting, _in supreme command_,
    Upon the borders of the unhappy Loire,
    For liberty, against deluded men,
    His fellow-countrymen....'

  Though it seems very easy to identify a general even with such scanty
  data, the task is rendered more difficult by two inaccuracies in
  Wordsworth's statement, which, however, can be explained and redressed
  without much difficulty.

  The first inaccuracy is in the spelling of the name, which is
  'Beaupuy' and not 'Beaupuis'--a slight mistake considering that
  Wordsworth was a foreigner, and, besides, wrote down his friend's name
  ten years and perhaps more after losing sight of him. Moreover, the
  name of the general who, I think, was meant by Wordsworth, I have
  found spelt 'Beaupuy' in one instance, viz. the signature of a letter
  of his, as printed in 'Vie et Correspondance de Merlin de Thionville',
  publiee par Jean Reynaud, Paris, 1860 (2'e partie p. 241).

  The spelling of proper names was not so fixed then as it is nowadays,
  and this irregularity is not to be wondered at.

  The second inaccuracy consists in stating that General Beaupuy died on
  the banks of the Loire during the Vendean war. Indeed, he was
  grievously wounded at the Battle of Chateau-Gonthier, on the 26th of
  October 1793, and reported as dead. His soldiers thought he had been
  killed, and the rumour must have spread abroad, as it was recorded by
  A. Thiers himself in his 'Histoire de la Revolution', and by A.
  Challemel in his 'Histoire Musee de la Republique Francaise'.

  It is no wonder that Wordsworth, who was then in England, and could
  only read imperfect accounts of what took place in France, should have
  been mistaken too.

  No other General Beaupuy is recorded in the history of the Revolution,
  so far as I have been able to ascertain. The moral character of the
  officer, whose life I shall relate, answers to Wordsworth's
  description, and is worthy of his high estimate.

  Armand Michel de Bachelier, Chevalier de Beaupuy, was born at
  Mussidan, in Perigord, on the 15th of July 1757. He belonged to a
  noble family, less proud of its antiquity than of the blood it had
  shed for France on many battlefields. On his mother's side (Mlle. de
  Villars), he reckoned Montaigne, the celebrated essayist, among his
  ancestors. His parents having imbibed the philanthropic ideas of the
  time, educated him according to their principles.

  He had four brothers, who were all destined to turn republicans and do
  good service to the new cause, though their interest certainly lay in
  the opposite direction.

  ...

  He was made sub-lieutenant in the regiment of Bassigny (33rd division
  of foot) on the 2nd of March 1773, and lieutenant of grenadiers on the
  1st of October of the same year.

  In 1791 he was first lieutenant in the same regiment. Having sided
  with the Revolution, he was appointed commander of a battalion of
  national volunteers in the department of Dordogne. I have not found
  the exact date of this appointment, but it must have taken place
  immediately after his stay at Orleans with Wordsworth.

  I have found no further mention of his name till September 1792, when
  he is known to have served in the "Armee du Rhin," under General
  Custine, and contributed to the taking of Spire.

  He took an important part in the taking of Worms, 4th October; of
  Mayence (Maenz) 21st October. He was among the garrison of Mayence
  when this place was besieged by the Prussians, and obliged to
  capitulate after a long and famous siege (from 6th April 1793 to 22nd
  July 1793). [A]

  During the siege he wrote a journal of all the operations.
  Unfortunately, this journal is very short, and purely military. It has
  been handed down to us, and is found in the Bibliotheque Nationale of
  Paris in the 'Papiers de Merlin de Thionville', n. acq. fr. Nos.
  244-252, 8 vol. in-8?. Beaupuy's journal is in the 3rd volume, fol.
  213-228.

  ...

  In the Vendean war, the "Mayencais," or soldiers returned from
  Mayence, made themselves conspicuous, and bore almost all the brunt of
  the campaign. But none of them distinguished himself more than
  Beaupuy, then a General of Brigade.

  The Mayencais arrived in Vendee at the end of August or beginning of
  September 1793. To Beaupuy's skill the victory of Chollet (Oct. 17,
  1793) is attributed by Jomini. In this battle he fought hand to hand
  with and overcame a Vendean cavalier. He himself had three horses
  killed, and had a very narrow escape. On the battlefield he was made
  'general of division' by the "Representants du peuple." It was after
  Chollet that the Vendeans made the memorable crossing of the Loire at
  St. Florent.

  At Laval and Chateau-Gonthier (Oct. 26) a terrible defeat was
  inflicted on the Republicans, owing to the incapacity of their
  commander-in-chief, Lechelle. The whole corps commanded by General
  Beaupuy was crushed by a terrible fire, He himself, after withstanding
  for two or three hours with 2000 or 3000 men all the attacks of the
  royalists, was disabled by a shot, and fell, crying out, "'Laissez-moi
  la, et portez a mes grenadiers ma chemise sanglante'." His soldiers
  thought he was dead, and then the error was spread, which was repeated
  by Wordsworth, Thiers, and Challamel. Wordsworth's mistake is so far
  interesting, as it seems to prove that very little or no
  correspondence passed between the two friends after they had parted.
  Beaupuy, moreover, had too much work upon his hands to give much of
  his time to letter-writing.

  Though severely wounded, Beaupuy lived on, and less than six weeks
  after the battle of Chateau-Gonthier, he was seen on the ramparts of
  Angers, where he required himself to be carried to animate his
  soldiers and head the defenders of the place, from which the Vendeans
  were driven after a severe contest (Dec. 5 and 6).

  On the 22nd of December 1793 he shared in the victory of Savenay with
  his celebrated friends, Marceau, Kleber, and Westermann. After this
  battle, which put an end to the great Vendean war, he wrote the
  following letter to his friend Merlin de Thionville, the celebrated
  "representant du peuple."

    "SAVENAY, le 4 Nivose au 2'e (25 Dec. 73).

    "Enfin, enfin, mon cher Merlin, elle n'est plus cette armee royale
    ou catholique, comme tu voudras! J'en ai vu, avec tes braves
    collegues Prieur et Eurreau, les debris, consistant en 150 cavaliers
    battant l'eau dans le marais de Montaire; et comme tu connais ma
    veracite tu peux dire avec assurance que les deux combats de Savenay
    ont mis fin a la guerre de la nouvelle Vendee et aux chimeriques
    esperances des royalists.

    L'histoire ne vous presente point de combat dont le suites aient ete
    plus decisives. Ah! mon brave, comme tu aurais joui! quelle attaque!
    mais quelle deroute aussi! Il fallait les voir ces soldats de Jesus
    et de Louis XVII, se jetant dans les marais ou obliges de se rendre
    par 5 ou 600 a la fois; et Langreniere pris et les autres generaux
    disperses et aux abois!

    Cette armee, dont tu avais vu les restes de la terrasse de St.
    Florent, etait redevenue formidable par son recrutement dans les
    departements envahis. Je les ai bien vus, bien examines, j'ai
    reconnu meme de mes figures de Chollet et de Laval, et a leur
    contenance et a leur mine, je l'assure qu'il ne leur manquait du
    soldat que l'habit. Des troupes qui ont battu de tels Francais
    peuvent se flatter ainsi de vainere des peuples assez laaches pour
    se reunir centre un seul et encore pour la cause des rois! Enfin, je
    ne sais si je me trompe, mais cette guerre de brigands, de paysans,
    sur laquelle on a jete tant de ridicule, que l'on dedaignait, que
    l'on affectait de regarder comme meprisable, m'a toujours paru, pour
    la republique, la grande partie, et il me semble a present qu'avec
    nos autres ennemis, nous ne ferrons plus que peloter.

    Adieu, brave montagnard, adieu! Actuellement que cette execrable
    guerre est terminee, que les manes de nos freres sont satisfaits, je
    vais guerir. J'ai obtenu de tes confreres un conge qui finira au
    moment ou la guerre recommencera.

    LE GENERAL DE BRIGADE BEAUPUY.


  I think I can recognize in this letter some traits of Beaupuy's
  character as pointed out by Wordsworth, not excepting the
  half-suppressed criticism:

      '... somewhat vain he was,
    Or seemed so, yet it was not vanity,
    But fondness, and a kind of radiant joy
    Diffused around him ...'

  Passing over numerous military incidents, on the 26th of June 1796
  Beaupuy received seven or eight sabre-cuts at Jorich-Wildstadt. But on
  the 8th of July he was already back at his post.

  He again greatly distinguished himself on the 1st of September 1796 at
  Greisenfeld and Langenbruck, where the victory of the French was owing
  to a timely attack made by Desaix and himself.

  He was one of the generals under Moreau when the latter achieved his
  well-known retreat through the Black Forest, begun on the 15th of
  September 1796, and during which many battles were fought. In one of
  the actions on the banks of the Elz, Beaupuy was killed by a
  cannon-ball, while opposing General Latour on the heights of
  Malterdingen. His soldiers, who loved him passionately, fought
  desperately to avenge his death (Oct. 19, 1796).

  One of Beaupuy's colleagues, General Duhem, in his account of the
  battle to the Government, thus expressed himself on General Beaupuy:

    "Ecrivains patriotes, orateurs chaleureux, je vous propose un noble
    sujet, l'eloge du General Beaupuy, de Beaupuy, le Nestor et
    l'Achille de notre armee. Vous n'avez pas de recherches a faire;
    interrogez le premier soldat de l'armee du Rhin-et-Moselle, ses
    larmes exciteront les votres. Ecrivez alors ce que est vous en dira,
    et vous peindrez le Bayard de la Republique Francaise."

  Such bombastic style was then common, but what we have seen of Beaupuy
  in this sketch shows that he had through his career united Nestor's
  prudence [B] with Achilles' bodily courage and Bayard's chivalric
  spirit,--to use the language of the time.

  General Moreau had Beaupuy's remains transported to Brisach, where a
  monument was erected to his memory in 1802, after the peace of
  Luneville.

  In short, Beaupuy seems to have always remained worthy of the high
  praise bestowed on him by Wordsworth. His name is to be remembered
  along with those of the unspotted generals of the first years of the
  Revolution--Hoche, Marceau, etc.--before the craving for conquest had
  developed, and the love of liberty yielded to a fond admiration of
  Bonaparte as it did in the case of Kleber, Desaix, and so many others.
  [C]

  N. B.--The great influence which Beaupuy exercised at that time on
  Wordsworth will be easily understood, if we take into account not only
  his real qualities, but also his age. When they met, Wordsworth was
  only twenty-one, Beaupuy nearly thirty-five. The grown-up man could
  impart much of his knowledge of life, and of the favourite authors of
  the time, to a youth fresh from the University--though that youth was
  Wordsworth.

  EMILE LEGOUIS.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES ON THE TEXT


[Footnote A: His bravery shone forth at Coethen, where he was left alone
in a group of Prussians. He fought with their chief and disarmed him. A
few days after he was named General of Brigade.--8th March 1793.]


[Footnote B: The pacification of Vendee was for a great part owing to
his valour and prudence.]

[Footnote C: Beaupuy is said to have united civic virtues with military
talents. A good son and a good brother, he showed in many a circumstance
that true valour does not exclude humanity, and that the soul can be
both strong and full of feeling.]


These notes (B and C) are taken from 'Biographic Nouvelle de
Contemporains'.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Poetical Works of William
Wordsworth, Vol. III, by William Wordsworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIAM WORDSWORTH POETRY, III ***

***** This file should be named 12383-8.txt or 12383-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/3/8/12383/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Clytie Siddall and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team!


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

